
[Illustration: _London Printed for W. Chetwood at Cato's head in Russel
Street Covent Garden_]




                                THE

                            REVOLUTIONS

                                OF

                            _PORTUGAL_.

                     Written in _French_ by the

                         Abbot _DE VERTOT_,
                      Of the ROYAL ACADEMY of
                           INSCRIPTIONS.

       Done into _English_ from the last _French_ Edition.

         _O think what anxious Moments pass between
         The Birth of Plots, and their last fatal Periods!
         Oh! 'tis a dreadful Interval of Time,
         Fill'd up with Horror all, and big with Death!
         Destruction hangs on ev'ry Word we speak,
         On ev'ry Thought, till the concluding Stroke
         Determines all, and closes our Design._

                                           ADDISON'S Cato.


                             _LONDON_,

            Printed for WILLIAM CHETWOOD, at _Cato_'s-
      _Head_, in _Russel-Street, Covent-Garden_. M.DCC.XXI.




[Illustration]


                           To His GRACE

                             _PHILIP_

                        Duke of _Wharton_.


_May it please your Grace_;

I am not ignorant of the Censure I lay my-self open to, in offering so
incorrect a Work to a Person of Your Grace's Judgment; and could not
have had Assurance to do it, if I was unacquainted with Your Grace's
Goodness. As this is not the first time of this Excellent Author's
appearing in _English_, my Undertaking must expose me to abundance of
Cavil and Criticism; and I see my-self reduced to the Necessity of
applying to a Patron who is able to protect me.

Our modern Dedications are meer Daub and Flattery; but 'tis for those
who deserve no better: Your Grace cannot be flatter'd; every body that
knows the Duke of WHARTON, will say there is no praising him, as there
is no loving him more than he deserves. But like other Great Minds, Your
Grace may be blind to your own Merit, and imagine I am complimenting, or
doing something worse, whilst I am only giving your just Character; for
which reason, however fond I am of so noble a Theme, I shall decline
attempting it. Only this I must beg leave to say, Your Grace can't be
enough admir'd for the Universal Learning which you are Master of, for
your Judgment in discerning, your Indulgence in excusing, for the great
Stedfastness of your Soul, for your Contempt of Power and Grandeur, your
Love for your Country, your Passion for Liberty, and (which is the best
Characteristick) your Desire of doing Good to Mankind. I can hardly
leave so agreeable a Subject, but I cannot say more than all the World
knows already.

Your Grace's illustrious Father has left a Name behind Him as glorious
as any Person of the Age: it is unnecessary to enter into the
Particulars of his Character; to mention his Name, is the greatest
Panegyrick: Immediately to succeed that Great Man, must have been
extremely to the Disadvantage of any other Person, but it is far from
being so to Your Grace; it makes your Virtues but the more conspicuous,
and convinces us the Nation is not without one Man worthy of being his
Successor.

I have nothing more to trouble Your Grace with, than only to wish you
the Honours you so well deserve, and to beg you would excuse my
presuming to honour my-self with the Title of,

    _May it please your Grace,
        Your Grace's most Obedient,
            Humble Servant_,

                     Gabriel Roussillon.




[Illustration]


PREFACE.


_Amongst the Historians of the present Age, none has more justly
deserv'd, neither has any acquir'd a greater Reputation than the Abbot
~de Vertot~; not only by this Piece, but also by the ~Revolutions
of~ Sweden ~and of~ Rome, which he has since publish'd._

_This small History he has extracted from the[A] Writings of several
~French~, ~Spanish~, ~Portuguese~, and ~Italian~ Authors, as
well as from the Testimony of many Persons, who were in ~Lisbon~ at
the time of the Revolution. And I believe that it will be no difficult
matter to persuade the Reader, that this little Volume is written with
much more Politeness and Fidelity than any which has been publish'd on
this Subject._

_And indeed there could be no Man fitter to undertake the Work than
Monsieur ~de Vertot~; not only as he was Master of an excellent Style,
and had all the Opportunities imaginable of informing himself of the
Truth, but also as he could have no Interest in speaking partially of
either the one or the other Party; and therefore might say much more
justly than ~Salust, de Conjuratione, Quam verissime potero, paucis
absolvam; eoque magis, quod mihi a Spe, Metu, Partibus Reipublic√¶ Animus
liber est~._

_Would I undertake to prove the Impartiality of my Author, I could
easily do it from several little Circumstances of his History. Does he
not tell us, that the Inquisition is oftner a Terror to honest Men than
to Rogues? Does he not paint the Archbishop of ~Braga~ in all the
Colours of a Traitor? And I am fully persuaded, that if a Churchman will
own and discover the Frailties, or rather the Enormities of those of his
own Cloth, he will tell them in any thing else, and is worthy of being
believed._

_There are several Passages in the following Sheets, which really
deserve our Attention; we shall see a Nation involv'd in Woe and Ruin,
and all their Miseries proceeding from the Bigotry and Superstition of
their Monarch, whose Zeal hurries him to inevitable Destruction, and
whose Piety makes him sacrifice the Lives of ~13000~ Christians,
without so much as having the Satisfaction of converting one obstinate
Infidel._

_Such was the Fate of the rash Don ~Sebastian~, who seem'd born to be
the Blessing of his People, and Terror of his Foes; who would have made
a just, a wise, a truly pious Monarch, had not his Education been
entrusted to a Jesuit. Nor is he the only unfortunate Prince, who,
govern'd by intriguing and insinuating Churchmen, have prov'd the Ruin
of their Kingdom, and in the end lost both their Crown and Life._

_We shall see a People, who, no longer able to bear a heavy Yoke, resolve
to shake it off, and venture their Lives and their Fortunes for their
Liberty: A Conspiracy prevail, (if an Intent to revolt from an Usurping
Tyrant may be call'd a Conspiracy) in which so many Persons, whose
Age, Quality and Interest were very different, are engag'd; and by the
Courage and Publick Spirit of a few, a happy and glorious Revolution
brought about._

_But scarce is the new King settled upon his Throne, and endeavouring to
confirm his Authority abroad, when a horrid Conspiracy is forming
against him at home; we shall see a Prelate at the head of the Traitors,
who, tho a bigotted Churchman, makes no scruple of borrowing the
Assistance of the most profess'd Enemies of the Church to deliver her
out of Danger, and to assassinate his Lawful King: but the whole Plot is
happily discover'd, and those who were engaged in it meet with the just
Reward of Treason and Rebellion, the Block and Gallows. Nor is it the
first time that our own Nation has seen an Archbishop doing King and
Country all the harm he could._

_After the Death of her Husband, we see a Queen of an extraordinary
Genius, and uncommon Courage, taking the Regency upon her; and tho at
first oppress'd with a Load of Misfortunes, rises against them all, and
in the end triumphs over her Enemies._

_Under the next Reign we see the Kingdom almost invaded by the antient
Usurper, and sav'd only by the Skill of a Wife and Brave General, who
had much ado to keep the Foes out, whilst the People were divided at
home, and loudly complain'd of the Riots and Debaucheries of their
Monarch, and the Tyrannick Conduct of his Minister. But we find how
impossible a thing it is, that so violent a Government should last long;
his Brother, a Prince whose Virtues were as famous, as the other's Vices
were odious, to preserve the Crown in their Family, is forced to depose
him, and take the Government upon himself: ~Ita Imperium semper ad
optumum quemq; ab minus bono transfertur~._




[Illustration]


                                THE

                            REVOLUTION

                                OF

                            _PORTUGAL_.


Portugal is part of that vast Tract of Land, known by the Name of
_Iberia_ or _Spain_, most of whose Provinces are call'd Kingdoms. It is
bounded on the West by the Ocean, on the East by _Castile_. Its Length
is about a hundred and ten Leagues, and its Breadth in the very broadest
part does not exceed fifty. The Soil is fruitful, the Air wholesome; and
tho under such a Climate we might expect excessive Heats, yet here we
always find them allay'd with cooling Breezes or refreshing Rains. Its
Crown is Hereditary, the King's Power Despotick, nor is the grand
Inquisition the most useless means of preserving this absolute
Authority. The _Portuguese_ are by Nature proud and haughty, very
zealous, but rather superstitious than religious; the most natural
Events will amongst them pass for Miracles, and they are firmly
persuaded that Heaven is always contriving something or other for their
Good.

Who the first Inhabitants of this Country were, is not known, their own
Historians indeed tell us that they are sprung from _Tubal_; for my
part, I believe them descended from the _Romans_ and _Carthaginians_,
who long contended for those Provinces, and who were both at sundry
times in actual possession of them. About the beginning of the fifth
Century, the _Swedes_, the _Vandals_, and all those other barbarous
Nations, generally known by the Name of _Goths_, over-run the Empire;
and, amongst other Places, made themselves Masters of the Provinces of
_Spain_. _Portugal_ was then made a Kingdom, and was sometimes govern'd
by its own Prince, at other times it was reckon'd part of the Dominions
of the King of _Castile_.

[Sidenote: 712.]

About the beginning of the eighth Century, during the Reign of
_Roderick_, the last King of the _Goths_, the _Moors_, or rather the
_Arabians_, _Valid Almanzor_ being their Caliph, enter'd _Spain_. They
were received and assisted by _Julian_, an _Italian_ Nobleman, who made
the Conquest of those Places easy, which might otherwise have proved
difficult, not out of any Affection to the _Arabians_, but from a
Desire of revenging himself on _Roderick_, who had debauched his
Daughter.

[Sidenote: 717.]

The _Arabians_ soon made themselves Masters of all the Country between
the Streights of _Gibraltar_ and the _Pyrenees_, excepting the Mountains
of _Asturia_; where the Christians, commanded by Prince _Pelagus_, fled,
who founded the Kingdom _Oviedo_ or _Leon_.

_Portugal_, with the rest of _Spain_, became subject to the Infidels. In
each respective Province, Governours were appointed, who after the Death
of _Almanzor_ revolted from his Successor, made themselves independent
of any other Power, and took the Title of Sovereign Princes.

They were driven out of _Portugal_ about the beginning of the twelfth
Century, by _Henry_ Count of _Burgundy_, Son to _Robert_ King of
_France_. This Prince, full of the same Zeal which excited so many
others to engage in a holy War, went into _Spain_ on purpose to attack
the Infidels; and such Courage, such Conduct did he show, that
_Alphonso_ VI. King of _Castile_ and _Leon_, made him General of his
Army: and afterwards, that he might for ever engage so brave a Soldier,
he married him to one of his Daughters, named _Teresia_, and gave him
all those Places from which he had driven the _Moors_. The Count, by new
Conquests, extended his Dominions, and founded the Kingdom of
_Portugal_, but never gave himself the Royal Title.

[Sidenote: 1139.]

_Alphonso_, his Son, did not only inherit his Father's Dominions, but
his Virtues also; and not content with what the Count his Father had
left him, he vigorously carried on the War, and encreas'd his
Territories. Having obtained a signal Victory over the _Arabians_, his
Soldiers unanimously proclaimed him King; which Title his Successors
have ever since borne.

And now this Family had sway'd the Scepter of _Portugal_ for almost the
space of five hundred Years, when Don _Sebastian_ came to the Crown; he
was the posthumous Son of Don _John_, who died some time before his
Father, Don _John_ III. Son of the renowned King _Emanuel_.

[Sidenote: 1557.]

Don _Sebastian_ was not above three Years of Age when the old King died;
his Grandmother _Catherine_, of the House of _Austria_, Daughter to
_Philip_ I. King of _Castile_, and Sister to the Emperor _Charles_ V.
was made Regent of _Portugal_ during his Minority. Don _Alexis de
Menezes_, a Nobleman noted for his singular Piety, was appointed
Governour to the young King, and Don _Lewis de Camara_, a Jesuit, was
named for his Tutor.

From such Teachers as these, what might not be expected? They filled his
Mind with Sentiments of Honour, and his Soul with Devotion. But, (which
may at first appear strange or impossible) these Notions were too often,
and too strongly inculcated in him.

_Menezes_ was always telling the young Prince what Victories his
Predecessors had obtain'd over the _Moors_ in the _Indies_, and in
almost every part of _Africa_. On the other hand, the Jesuit was
perpetually teaching him, that the Crown of Kings was the immediate
Gift of _God_, and that therefore the chiefest Duty of a Prince was to
propagate the Holy Gospel, and to have the Word of the _Lord_ preached
to those Nations, who had never heard of the Name of _Christ_.

These different Ideas of Honour and Religion made a deep impression on
the Heart of Don _Sebastian_, who was naturally pious. Scarce therefore
had he taken the Government of _Portugal_ upon himself, but he thought
of transporting an Army into _Africa_; and to that end he often
conferr'd with his Officers, but oftener with his Missionaries and other
Ecclesiasticks.

A Civil War breaking out about this time in _Morocco_, seem'd very much
to favour his Design. The Occasion was this: _Muley Mahomet_ had caus'd
himself to be proclaim'd King of _Morocco_ after the Death of _Abdalla_,
his Father; _Muley Moluc_, _Abdalla_'s Brother, opposed him, objecting
that he had ascended the Throne contrary to the Law of the Cherifs, by
which it is ordained, That the Crown shall devolve to the King's
Brethren, if he has any, and his Sons be excluded the Succession. This
occasion'd a bloody War between the Uncle and the Nephew; but _Muley
Moluc_, who was as brave a Soldier as he was a wise Commander, defeated
_Mahomet_'s Army in three pitch'd Battles, and drove him out of
_Africa_.

The exil'd Prince fled for Refuge to the Court of _Portugal_, and
finding Access to Don _Sebastian_, told him, that notwithstanding his
Misfortunes, there were still a considerable Number of his Subjects, who
were loyal in their Hearts, and wanted only an Opportunity of declaring
themselves in his favour. That besides this, he was very well assured
that _Moluc_ was afflicted with a lingring Disease, which prey'd upon
his Vitals; that _Hamet_, _Moluc_'s Brother, was not belov'd by the
People; that therefore if Don _Sebastian_ would but send him with a
small Army into _Africa_, so many of his Subjects would come over to
him, that he did not in the least question but that he should soon
re-establish himself in his Father's Dominions: which, if he did recover
by these means, the Kingdom should become tributary to the Crown of
_Portugal_; nay, that he would much rather have Don _Sebastian_ himself
fill the Throne of _Morocco_, than see it in possession of the present
Usurper.

Don _Sebastian_, who was ever entertaining himself with the Ideas of
future Conquests, thought this Opportunity of planting the Christian
Religion in _Morocco_ was not to be neglected; and therefore promis'd
the _Moorish_ King not only his Assistance, but rashly engaged himself
in the Expedition, giving out that he intended to command the Army in
Person. The wisest of his Counsellors in vain endeavour'd to dissuade
him from the dangerous Design. His Zeal, his Courage, an inconsiderate
Rashness, the common Fault of Youth, as well as some Flatterers, the
Bane of Royalty, and Destruction of Princes, all prompted him to
continue fixed in his Resolution, and persuaded him that he needed only
appear in _Africa_ to overcome, and that his Conquests would be both
easy and glorious. To this end he embarked with an Army of Thirteen
Thousand Men, with which he was to drive a powerful Prince out of his
own Dominions.

_Moluc_ had timely notice given him of the _Portuguese_ Expedition, and
of their landing in _Africa_; he had put himself at the head of Forty
Thousand Horsemen, all disciplin'd Soldiers, and who were not so much to
be dreaded for their Number and Courage, as they were for the Conduct of
their General. His Infantry he did not at all value himself upon, not
having above Ten Thousand Regular Men; there was indeed a vast Number of
the Militia, and others of the People who came pouring down to his
Assistance, but these he justly look'd upon as Men who were rather come
to plunder than to fight, and who would at any time side with the
Conqueror.

Several Skirmishes were fought, but _Moluc_'s Officers had private
Orders still to fly before the Foe, hoping thereby to make the
_Portuguese_ leave the Shore, where they had intrench'd themselves. This
Stratagem had its desir'd Effect; for Don _Sebastian_ observing that the
_Moors_ still fled before him, order'd his Army to leave their
Intrenchments, and marched against the Foe as to a certain Victory.
_Moluc_ made his Army retire, as if he did not dare to fight a decisive
Battle; nay, sent Messengers to Don _Sebastian_, who pretended they were
order'd to treat of Peace. The King of _Portugal_ immediately concluded,
that his Adversary was doubtful of the Success of the War, and that
'twould be an easier matter to overcome _Moluc_'s Army, than to join
them; he therefore indefatigably pursued them. But the _Moor_ had no
sooner drawn him far enough from the Shore, and made it impossible for
him to retire to his Fleet, but he halted, faced the _Portuguese_, and
put his Army in Battalia; the Horse making a half Circle, with intent,
as soon as they engaged, to surround the Enemy on every side. _Moluc_
made _Hamet_, his Brother and Successor, Commander in chief of the
Cavalry; but as he doubted his Courage, he came up to him a little
before the Engagement, told him that he must either conquer or die, and
that should he prove Coward enough to turn his back upon the Foe, he
would strangle him with his own hand.

The reason why _Moluc_ did not command the Army himself, was, that he
was sensible of the Increase of his lingring Disease, and found that in
all probability this Day would be his last, and therefore resolved to
make it the most glorious of his Life. He put his Army, as I said
before, in Battalia himself, and gave all the necessary Orders with as
much Presence of Mind, as if he had enjoy'd the greatest Health. He went
farther than this; for foreseeing what a sudden Damp the News of his
Death might cast upon the Courage of his Soldiers, he order'd the
Officers that were about him, that if during the Heat of the Battle he
should die, they should carefully conceal it, and that even after his
Death, his _Aides de Camp_ should come up to his Litter, as if to
receive fresh Orders. After this he was carried from Rank to Rank, where
he exhorted his Soldiers to fight bravely for the Defence of their
Religion and their Country.

But now the Combat began, and the great Artillery being discharg'd, the
Armies join'd. The _Portuguese_ Infantry soon routed the _Moorish_
Foot-Soldiers, who, as was before mention'd, were raw and undisciplin'd;
the Duke _d'Aviedo_ engaged with a Parry of Horse so happily, that they
gave ground, and retir'd to the very Center of the Army, where the King
was. Enraged at so unexpected a Sight, notwithstanding what his Officers
could say or do, he threw himself out of his Litter; Sword in hand he
clear'd himself a Passage, rallied his flying Soldiers, and led them
back himself to the Engagement. But this Action quite exhausting his
remaining Strength and Spirits, he fainted; his Officers put him into
his Litter, where he just recover'd Strength enough to put his Finger
upon his Mouth once more, to enjoin Secrecy, then died before they could
convey him back to his Tent. His Commands were obey'd, and the News of
his Death conceal'd.

[Sidenote: _Aug. 4. 1578._]

Hitherto the Christians seem'd to have the Advantage, but the _Moorish_
Horse advancing at last, hemm'd in _Sebastian_'s whole Army, and
attack'd them on every side. The Cavalry was drove back upon their
Infantry, whom they trampled under foot, and spread every where amongst
their own Soldiers, Disorder, Fear, and Confusion. The Infidels seiz'd
upon this Advantage, and Sword in hand fell upon the conquer'd Troops; a
dreadful Slaughter ensu'd, some on their knees begg'd for quarter,
others thought to save themselves by flight, but being surrounded by
their Foes, met their Fate in another place. The rash Don _Sebastian_
himself was slain, but whether he fell amidst the Horror and Confusion
of the Battle, not being known by the _Moors_, or whether he was
resolv'd not to survive the Loss of so many of his Subjects, whom he had
led on to a Field of Slaughter, is doubtful. _Muley Mahomet_ got off,
but passing the River _Mucazen_, was drown'd. Thus perish'd, in one
fatal Day, three Heroick Princes.

The Cardinal, Don Henry, great Uncle to Don _Sebastian_, succeeded him;
he was Brother to _John_ III. the late King's Grandfather, and Son to
_Emanuel_. During his Reign, his pretended Heirs made all the Interest
they could in the Court of _Portugal_, being well assur'd that the
present King, who was weak and sickly, and sixty-seven Years old, could
not be long-liv'd; nor could he marry, and leave Children behind him,
for he was a Cardinal, and in Priest's Orders. The Succession was
claim'd by _Philip_ II. King of _Spain_; _Catherine_ of _Portugal_,
espous'd to Don _James_, Duke of _Braganza_; by the Duke of _Savoy_; the
Duke of _Parma_; and by _Antonio_, Grand Prior of _Crete_: They all
publish'd their respective Manifesto's, in which every one declar'd
their Pretensions to the Crown.

_Philip_ was Son to the Infanta _Isabella_, eldest Daughter of King
_Emanuel_. The Dutchess of _Braganza_ was Granddaughter to the same King
_Emanuel_, by _Edward_ his second Son. The Duke of _Savoy_'s Mother was
the Princess _Beatrix_, a younger Sister of the Empress _Isabella_. The
Duke of _Parma_ was Son to _Mary_ of _Portugal_, the second Daughter of
Prince _Edward_, and Sister to the Dutchess of _Braganza_. Don _Lewis_,
Duke of _Beja_, was second Son to King _Emanuel_ by _Violenta_, the
finest Lady of that Age, whom he had debauch'd, but whom the Grand Prior
pretended to have been privately married to that Prince. _Catherine de
Medicis_, amongst the rest, made her Claim, as being descended from
_Alphonso_ III. King of _Portugal_, and _Maud_ Countess of _Bolonia_.
The _Pope_ too put in his Claim; he would have it, that after the Reign
of the _Cardinal_, _Portugal_ must be look'd upon as a fat Living in his
Gift, and to which, like many a modern Patron, he would willingly have
presented himself.

But notwithstanding all their Pretensions, it plainly appear'd that the
Succession belong'd either to _Philip_ King of _Spain_, or to the
Dutchess of _Braganza_, a Lady of an extraordinary Merit, and belov'd by
the whole Nation. The Duke, her Spouse, was descended, tho not in a
direct Line, from the Royal Blood, and she herself was sprung from
Prince _Edward_; whereas the King of _Spain_ was Son to _Edward_'s
Sister: besides, by the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, all Strangers
were excluded the Succession. This _Philip_ own'd, since thereby the
Pretensions of _Savoy_ and _Parma_ vanish'd; but he would by no means
acknowledge himself a Stranger in _Portugal_, which he said had often
been part of the Dominions of the King of _Castile_. Each had their
several Parties at Court, and the _Cardinal_ King was daily press'd to
decide the Difference, but always evaded it; he could not bear to hear
of his Successors, and would willingly have liv'd to have bury'd all his
pretended Heirs: however, his Reign lasted but 17 Months, and by his
Death _Portugal_ became the unhappy Theatre of Civil Wars.

[Sidenote: 1580.]

By his last Will he had order'd, that a Juncto, or Assembly of the
States, should be call'd, to settle the Succession; but King _Philip_
not caring to wait for their Decision, sent a powerful Army into
_Portugal_, commanded by the Duke of _Alba_, which ended the Dispute,
and put _Philip_ in possession of that Kingdom.

[Sidenote: 1581.]

We cannot find that the Duke of _Braganza_ us'd any Endeavours to assert
his Right by force of Arms. The Grand Prior indeed did all he could to
oppose the _Castilians_; the Mob had proclaim'd him King, and he took
the Title upon him, as if it had been given by the States of _Portugal_:
and his Friends rais'd some Forces for him, but they were soon cut in
pieces by the Duke of _Alba_, than whom _Spain_ could not have chosen a
better General. As much as the _Portuguese_ hate the _Castilians_, yet
could they not keep them out, being disunited among themselves, and
having no General, nor any Regular Troops on foot. Most of the Towns,
for fear of being plunder'd, capitulated, and made each their several
Treaty; so that in a short time _Philip_ was acknowledg'd their lawful
Sovereign by the whole Nation, as being next Heir Male to his great
Uncle, the late King: of such wondrous use is open Force to support a
bad Cause!

After him reign'd his Son and Grandson, _Philip_ III. and IV. who us'd
the _Portuguese_ not like Subjects, but like a conquer'd People; and the
Kingdom of _Portugal_ saw itself dwindle into a Province of _Spain_, and
so weaken'd, that there was no hope left of recovering their Liberty:
Their Noblemen durst not appear in an Equipage suitable to their Birth,
for fear of making the _Spanish_ Ministers jealous of their Greatness or
Riches; the Gentry were confin'd to their Country-Seats, and the People
oppress'd with Taxes.

The Duke of _Olivarez_, who was then first Minister to _Philip_ IV. King
of _Spain_, was firmly persuaded, that all means were to be us'd to
exhaust this new Conquest; he was sensible of the natural Antipathy of
the _Portuguese_ and _Castilians_, and thought that the former could
never calmly behold their chief Posts fill'd with Strangers, or at best
with _Portuguese_ of a _Plebeian_ Extraction, who had nothing else to
recommend 'em but their Zeal for the Service of _Spain_. He thought
therefore, that the surest way of establishing King _Philip_'s Power,
was to remove the Nobility of _Portugal_ from all Places of Trust, and
so to impoverish the People, that they should never be capable of
attempting to shake off the _Spanish_ Yoke. Besides this, he employ'd
the _Portuguese_ Youth in foreign Wars, resolving to drain the Kingdom
of all those who were capable of bearing Arms.

As politick as this Conduct of _Olivarez_ might appear, yet did he miss
his aim; for carrying his Cruelty to too high a pitch, at a time when
the Court of _Spain_ was in distress, and seeming rather to plunder an
Enemy's Country, than levying Taxes from the _Portuguese_, who daily saw
their Miseries encrease, and be the consequence of their Attempt what it
would, they could never fare worse; unanimously resolv'd to free
themselves from the intolerable Tyranny of Spain.

[Sidenote: 1640.]

_Margaret of Savoy_, Dutchess of _Mantua_, was then in _Portugal_, where
she had the Title of Vice-Queen, but was very far from having the Power.
_Miguel Vasconcellos_, a _Portuguese_ by Birth, but attach'd to the
_Spanish_ Interest, had the Name of Secretary of State, but was indeed
an absolute and independent Minister, and dispatch'd, without the
knowledge of the Vice-Queen, all the secret Business; his Orders he
receiv'd directly from _d'Olivarez_, whose Creature he was, and who
found him absolutely necessary for extorting vast Sums of Money from the
_Portuguese_. He was so deeply learn'd in the Art of Intriguing, that he
could perpetually make the Nobility jealous of one another, then would
he foment their Divisions, and encrease their Animosities, whereby the
_Spanish_ Government became every day more absolute; for the Duke was
assur'd, that whilst the Grandees were engag'd in private Quarrels, they
would never think of the Common Cause.

The Duke of _Braganza_ was the only Man in all _Portugal_, of whom the
_Spaniards_ were now jealous. His Humour was agreeable, and the chief
thing he consulted was his Ease. He was a Man rather of sound Sense,
than quick Wit. He could easily make himself Master of any Business to
which he apply'd his Mind, but then he never car'd much for the Trouble
on't. Don _Theodosius_, Duke of _Braganza_, his Father, was of a fiery
and passionate Temper, and had taken care to infuse in his Son's Mind an
Hereditary Aversion to the _Spaniards_, who had usurp'd a Crown, that of
Right belonged to him; to swell his Mind with the Ambition of
repossessing himself of a Throne, which his Ancestors had been unjustly
depriv'd of; and to fill his Soul with all the Courage that would be
necessary for the carrying on of so great a Design.

Nor was this Prince's Care wholly lost; Don _John_ had imbib'd as much
of the Sentiments of his Father as were consistent with so mild and easy
a Temper. He abhorr'd the _Spaniards_, yet was not at all uneasy at his
Incapacity of revenging himself. He entertain'd Hopes of ascending the
Throne of _Portugal_, yet did he not shew the least Impatience, as Duke
_Theodosius_, his Father, had done, but contented himself with a distant
Prospect of a Crown; nor would for an Uncertainty venture the Quiet of
his Life, and a Fortune which was already greater than what was well
consistent with the Condition of a Subject. Had he been precisely what
Duke _Theodosius_ wish'd him, he had never been fit for the great
Design; for _d'Olivarez_ had him observ'd so strictly, that had his easy
and pleasant manner of Living proceeded from any other Cause but a
natural Inclination, it had certainly been discover'd, and the Discovery
had prov'd fatal both to his Life and Fortune: at least the Court of
_Spain_ would never have suffer'd him to live in so splendid a manner in
the very Heart of his Country.

Had he been the most refin'd Politician, he could never have liv'd in a
manner less capable of giving Suspicion. His Birth, his Riches, his
Title to the Crown, were not criminal in themselves, but became so by
the Law of Policy. This he was very sensible of, and therefore chose
this way of Living, prompted to it as well by Nature as by Reason. It
would have been a Crime to be formidable, he must therefore take care
not to appear so: At _Villa-Viciosa_, the Seat of the Dukes of
_Braganza_, nothing was thought of but Hunting-Matches, and other Rural
Diversions; the Brightness of his Parts could not in the least make the
_Spaniards_ apprehend any bold Undertaking, but the Solidity of his
Understanding made the _Portuguese_ promise themselves the Enjoyment of
a mild and easy King, provided they would undertake to raise him to the
Throne. But an Accident soon after happen'd, which very much alarm'd
_Olivarez_.

Some new Taxes being laid upon the People of _Evora_, which they were
not able to pay, reduc'd 'em to Despair; upon which they rose in a
tumultuous manner, loudly exclaiming against the _Spanish_ Tyranny, and
declaring themselves in favour of the House of _Braganza_. Then, but too
late, the Court of _Spain_ began to be sensible of their Error, in
leaving so rich and powerful a Prince in the Heart of a Kingdom so
lately subdued, and to whose Crown he had such Legal Pretensions.

This made the Council of _Spain_ immediately determine, that it was
necessary to secure the Duke of _Braganza_, or at best not to let him
make any longer stay in _Portugal_. To this end they nam'd him Governour
of _Milan_, which Government he refus'd, alledging the Weakness of his
Constitution for an Excuse: besides, he said he was wholly unacquainted
with the Affairs of _Italy_, and by consequence not capable of
acquitting himself in so weighty a Post.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: 1640.]

The Duke _d'Olivarez_, seem'd to approve of the Excuse, and therefore
began to think of some new Expedient to draw him to Court. The King's
marching at the head of his Army to the Frontiers of _Arragon_, to
suppress the rebelling _Catalonians_, was a very good Pretence; he wrote
to the Duke of _Braganza_, "to come at the head of the _Portuguese_
Nobility to serve the King in an Expedition, which could not but be
glorious, since his Majesty commanded it in Person." The Duke, who had
no great relish for any Favour confer'd by the Court of _Spain_, excus'd
himself, upon pretence that "his Birth would oblige him to be at a much
greater Expence than what he was at present able to support."

This second Refusal alarm'd _d'Olivarez_. Notwithstanding Don _John_'s
easy Temper, he began to be afraid that the _Evorians_ had made an
impression upon his Thoughts, by reminding him of his Right to the
Throne. It was dangerous to leave him any longer in his Country, and
equally dangerous to hurry him out of it by force; so great a Love had
the _Portuguese_ ever bore to the House of _Braganza_, so great a
Respect did they bear to this Duke in particular. He must therefore
treacherously be drawn into _Spain_, nor could any properer means be
thought of, for compassing this end, than by shewing him all the seeming
Tokens of an unfeigned Friendship.

_France_ and _Spain_ were at that time engag'd in War, and the _French_
Fleet had been seen off the Coasts of _Portugal_. This gave the
_Spanish_ Minister a fair opportunity of accomplishing his Ends; for it
was necessary to have an Army on foot, under the Command of some brave
General, to hinder the _French_ from making a Descent, or landing any
where in _Portugal_. The Commission was sent to the Duke of _Braganza_,
with an absolute Authority over all the Towns and Garisons, as well as a
Power over the Maritime Forces; in short, so unlimited was the Command
given him, that the Minister seem'd blindly to have deliver'd all
_Portugal_ into his power: but this was only the better to colour his
Design. Don _Lopez Ozorio_, the _Spanish_ Admiral, had private Orders
sent him, that as soon as Don _John_ should visit any of the Ports, he
should put in, as if drove by stress of Weather; then artfully invite
the General aboard, immediately hoist sail, and with all possible
expedition bring him into _Spain_. But propitious Fortune seem'd to have
taken him into her Protection; a violent Storm arose, which dispers'd
the _Spanish_ Fleet, part of which suffer'd shipwreck, and the rest
were so shatter'd, that they could not make _Portugal_.

This ill Success did not in the least discourage _Olivarez_, or make him
drop his Project; he attributed the Escape of the Duke of _Braganza_ to
meer Chance: he wrote him a Letter, full of Expressions of Friendship,
and as if he had with him shar'd the Government of the whole Kingdom,
wherein he deplor'd the Loss of the Fleet, and told him, that the King
now expected that he would carefully review all the Ports and their
respective Fortifications, seeing that the Fleet, which was to defend
the Coasts of _Portugal_ from the Insults of the _French_, had miserably
perish'd. And that his Villany might not be suspected, he return'd him
Forty Thousand Ducats to defray his Expences, and to raise more Troops,
in case there should be a necessity of them. At the same time he sent
private Orders to all the Governours of Forts and Citadels, (the
greatest part whereof were _Spaniards_) that if they should find a
favourable occasion of securing the Duke of _Braganza_, they should do
it, and forthwith convey him into _Spain_.

This entire Confidence which was repos'd in him, alarm'd the Duke; he
plainly saw that there was Treachery intended, and therefore thought it
just to return the Treachery. He wrote an Answer to _Olivarez_, wherein
he told him, that with Joy he accepted the Honour which the King had
confer'd upon him, in naming him his General, and promis'd so to
discharge the important Trust, as to deserve the Continuation of his
Majesty's Favour.

But now the Duke began to have a nearer Prospect of the Throne; nor did
he neglect this opportunity of putting some of his Friends into Places
of Trust, that they might be the more able to serve him upon occasion;
he also employ'd part of the _Spanish_ Money in making new Creatures,
and confirming those in his Interest whom he had already made. And as he
partly mistrusted the _Spaniards_ Design, he never visited any Fort, but
he was surrounded by such a Number of Friends, that it was impossible
for the Governours to execute their Orders.

Mean while the Court of _Spain_ loudly murmur'd at the Trust which was
repos'd in Don _John_, they were ignorant of the Prime Minister's Aim,
and therefore some did not stick to tell the King, that his near
Alliance to the House of _Braganza_ made him overlook his Master's
Interest; seeing that it was the highest Imprudence to put so absolute
an Authority into the hands of one who had such Pretensions to the
Crown, and to entrust the Army to the Command of one, who in all
probability might make the Soldiers turn their Arms against their lawful
Sovereign. But the more they complain'd, the better was the King
pleas'd, being persuaded that the Plot was artfully laid, since no one
could unravel the dark Design. Thus _Braganza_ not only had the liberty,
but was oblig'd to visit all _Portugal_, and by that means laid the
Foundation of his future Fortune. The Eyes of the Many were every where
drawn by his magnificent Equipage, all that came to him, he mildly, and
with unequal'd Goodness heard; the Soldiers were not suffer'd to commit
the least Disorders, and he laid hold of all Opportunities of praising
the Conduct of the Officers, and by frequent Recompences bestow'd upon
them, won their Hearts. The Nobility were charm'd with his free
Deportment, he receiv'd every one of them in the most obliging manner,
and paid each the Respect due to his Quality. In short, such was his
Carriage, that the People began to think there could be no greater
Happiness for them upon Earth, than the Restoration of the Prince to the
Throne of his Ancestors.

Mean while his Party omitted nothing that they thought might contribute
to the establishing of his Reputation. Amongst others, _Pinto Ribeiro_,
Comptroller of his Household, particularly distinguish'd himself, and
was the first who form'd an exact Scheme for the Advancement of his
Master. There was no Man more experienc'd in Business, who at the same
time was so careful, diligent, and watchful: he was firm to the Interest
of the Duke, not doubting but that if he could raise him to the Throne,
he should raise himself to some considerable Post. His Master had often
privately assur'd him, that he would willingly lay hold of any fair
Opportunity for his Restoration, yet would not rashly declare himself,
as a Man who had nothing to lose; that notwithstanding he might
endeavour to gain the Minds of the People, and to make new Creatures,
yet he must do it with that Caution, that it might appear his own Work,
and done without the Consent and Knowledge of the Duke.

_Pinto_ had spar'd no pains in discovering who were, and the Number of
the Disaffected, which he daily endeavoured to encrease; he rail'd
against the present Government sometimes with Heat, at other times with
Caution, always accommodating himself to the Humour of the Company which
he was in: tho indeed so great was the Hatred which the _Portuguese_
bore the _Spaniards_, that there was no need of Reserve in complaining
of them. He would often remind the Nobility what honourable Employments
their Forefathers had borne, when _Portugal_ was govern'd by its own
Kings. Then would he mention the Summons which had so much exasperated
the Nobility, and by which they were commanded to attend the King in
_Catalonia_. _Pinto_ us'd to complain of this Hardship as of a kind of
Banishment, from which they would scarce find it possible to return;
that the Pride of the _Spaniards_, who would command them, was
insufferable, and the Expence they should be at intolerable; that this
was only a plausible Pretence to drain _Portugal_ of its bravest Men,
that in all their Expeditions they might be assur'd of being expos'd
where the greatest Danger was, but that they must never hope to share
the least part of the Glory.

When he was amongst the Merchants and other Citizens, he would bewail
the Misery of his Country, which was ruin'd by the Injustice of the
_Spaniard_, who had transfer'd the Trade, which _Portugal_ carried on
with the _Indies_, to _Cadiz_. Then would he remind them of the Felicity
which the _Dutch_ and _Catalonians_ enjoy'd, who had shaken off the
_Spanish_ Yoke. As for the Clergy, he did not in the least question but
that he should engage 'em in his Interest, and exasperate 'em most
irreconcileably against the _Castilians_; he told them, that the
Immunities and Privileges of the Church were violated, their Orders
contemn'd and neglected, and that all the best Preferments and fattest
Livings were possess'd by foreign Incumbents.

When he was with those, of whose Disaffection he was already convinc'd,
he would take care to turn his Discourse to his Master, and talk of his
manner of Living. He would often complain, that that Prince shew'd too
little Affection for the Good of his Country, and Concern for his own
Interest; and that at a time when it was in his power to assert his
Title to the Crown, he should seem so regardless of his own Right, and
lead so idle a Life. Finding that these Insinuations made an impression
upon the People, he went still farther: To those who were
publick-spirited, he represented what a glorious thing it would be for
them to lay the Foundations of a Revolution, and to deserve the Name of
_Deliverers of their Country_. Those who had been injur'd and
ill-treated by the _Spaniards_, he would excite to the Desire of
Revenge; and the Ambitious he flatter'd with a Prospect of the Grandeurs
and Preferments they might expect from the new King, would they once
raise him to the Throne. In short, he manag'd every thing with so much
Art, that being privately assur'd of the unshaken Affection of many to
his Master, he procur'd a Meeting of a considerable Number of the
Nobility, with the Archbishop of _Lisbon_ at the head of them.

This Prelate was of the House of _Acugna_, one of the best Families of
all _Portugal_; he was a Man of Learning, and an excellent Politician,
belov'd by the People, but hated by the _Spaniards_, and whom he had
also just cause to hate, since they had made Don _Sebastian Maltos de
Norognia_, Archbishop of Braga, President of the Chamber of _Opaco_,
whom they had all along prefer'd to him, and to whom they had given a
great share in the Administration of Affairs.

Another of the most considerable Members of this Assembly, was Don
_Miguel d'Almeida_, a venerable old Man, and who deserv'd, and had the
Esteem of every body; he was very publick-spirited, and was not so much
griev'd at his own private Misfortunes, as at those of his Country,
whose Inhabitants were become the Slaves of an usurping Tyrant. In these
Sentiments he had been educated, and to these with undaunted Courage and
Resolution he still adher'd; nor could the Entreaties of his Relations,
nor the repeated Advices of his Friends, ever make him go to Court, or
cringe to the _Spanish_ Ministers. This Carriage of his had made them
jealous of him. This therefore was the Man whom _Pinto_ first cast his
eyes upon, being well assur'd that he might safely entrust him with the
Secret; besides which, no one could be more useful in carrying on their
Design, his Interest with the Nobility being so great, that he could
easily bring over a considerable Number of them to his Party.

There were, besides these two, at this first Meeting, Don _Antonio
d'Almada_, an intimate Friend of the Archbishop's, with Don _Lewis_, his
Son; Don _Lewis d'Acugna_, Nephew to that Prelate, and who had married
Don _Antonio d'Almada_'s Daughter; _Mello_ Lord _Ranger_, Don _George_
his Brother; _Pedro Mendoza_; Don _Rodrigo de Saa_, Lord-Chamberlain:
with several other Officers of the Houshold, whose Places were nothing
now but empty Titles, since _Portugal_ had lost her own natural Kings.

[Sidenote: Conostagio.]

The Archbishop, who was naturally a good Rhetorician, broke the Ice in
this Assembly; he made an eloquent Speech, in which he set forth the
many Grievances _Portugal_ had labour'd under since it had been subject
to the Domination of _Spain_. He reminded them of the Number of Nobility
which _Philip_ II. had butchered to secure his Conquest; nor had he been
more favourable to the Church, witness the famous Brief of Absolution,
which he had obtain'd from the Pope for the Murder of Two Thousand
Priests, or others of Religious Orders, whom he had barbarously put to
death, on no other account but to secure his Usurpation: And since that
unhappy time the _Spaniards_ had not chang'd their inhuman Policy; how
many had fallen for no other Crime but their unshaken Love to their
Country! That none of those who were there present, could call their
Lives or their Estates their own: That the Nobility were slighted and
remov'd from all Places of Trust, Profit, or Power: That the Church was
fill'd with a scandalous Clergy, since _Vasconcellos_ had dispos'd of
all the Livings, and to which he had prefer'd his own Creatures only:
That the People were oppress'd with excessive Taxes, whilst the Earth
remain'd untill'd for want of hands, their Labourers being all sent away
by force, for Soldiers to _Catalonia_: That this last Summons for the
Nobility to attend the King, was only a specious Pretence to force them
out of their own Country, lest their Presence might prove an Obstacle to
some cruel Design, which was doubtless on foot: That the mildest Fate
they could hope for, was a tedious, if not a perpetual Banishment; and
that whilst they were ill-treated by the _Castilians_ abroad, Strangers
should enjoy their Estates, and new Colonies take possession of their
Habitations. He concluded by assuring them, that so great were the
Miseries of his Country, that he would rather chuse to die ten thousand
Deaths, than be obliged to see the Encrease of them; nor would he now
entertain one thought of Life, did he not hope that so many Persons of
Quality were not met together in vain.

This Discourse had its desir'd effect, by reminding every one of the
many Evils which they had suffer'd. Each seem'd earnest to give some
instance of _Vasconcellos_'s Cruelty. The Estates of some had been
unjustly confiscated, whilst others had Hereditary Places and
Governments taken from them; some had been long confin'd in Prisons
thro the Jealousy of the _Spanish_ Ministers, and many bewail'd a
Father, a Brother, or a Friend, either detain'd at _Madrid_, or sent
into _Catalonia_ as Hostages of the Fidelity of their unhappy
Countrymen. In short, there was not one of those who were engag'd in
this Publick Cause, but what had some private Quarrel to revenge: but
nothing provoked them more than the _Catalonian_ Expedition; they
plainly saw, that it was not so much the want of their assistance, as
the desire of ruining them, which made the _Spanish_ Minister oblige
them to that tedious and expensive Voyage. These Considerations, join'd
to their own private Animosities, made 'em unanimously resolve to
venture Life and Fortune, rather than any longer to bear the heavy Yoke:
but the Form of Government which they ought to chuse, caus'd a Division
amongst them. Part of the Assembly were for making themselves a
Republick, as _Holland_ had lately done; others were for a Monarchy, but
could not agree upon the choice of a King: some propos'd the Duke of
_Braganza_, some the Marquis de _Villareal_, and others the Duke
_d'Aviedo_, (all three Princes of the Royal Blood of _Portugal_,)
according as their different Inclinations or Interests byass'd them. But
the Archbishop, who was wholly devoted to the House of _Braganza_,
assuming the Authority of his Character, set forth with great strength
of Reason, That the Choice of a Government was not in their power; that
the Oath of Allegiance which they had taken to the King of _Spain_,
could not in conscience be broken, unless it was with a design to
restore their rightful Sovereign to the Throne of his Fathers, which
every one knew to be the Duke of _Braganza_; that they must therefore
resolve to proclaim him King, or for ever to continue under the Tyranny
of the _Spanish_ Usurper. After this, he made 'em consider the Power and
Riches of this Prince, as well as the great number of his Vassals, on
whom depended almost a third part of the Kingdom. He shew'd 'em it was
impossible for 'em to drive the _Spaniards_ out of _Portugal_, unless he
was at their head: that the only way to engage him, would be by making
him an Offer of the Crown, which they would be under a Necessity of
doing, altho he was not the first Prince of the Royal Blood. Then began
he to reckon all those excellent Qualities with which he was endow'd, as
his Wisdom, his Prudence; but above all, his affable Behaviour, and
inimitable Goodness. In short, his Words prevail'd so well upon every
one, that they unanimously declared him their King, and promis'd that
they would spare no Pains, no Endeavours to engage him to enter into
their Measures: after which, having agreed upon the time and place of a
second Meeting, to concert the ways and means of bringing this happy
Revolution about, the Assembly broke up.

_Pinto_ observing how well the Minds of the People were dispos'd in
favour of his Master, wrote privately to him, to acquaint him with the
Success of the first Meeting, and advis'd him to come, as if by chance,
to _Lisbon_, that by his Presence he might encourage the Conspirators,
and at the same time get some Opportunity of conferring with them. This
Man spent his whole time in negotiating this grand Affair, yet did it so
artfully, that no one could suspect his having any farther Interest in
it, than his Concern for the Publick Welfare. He seemingly doubted
whether his Master would ever enter into their Measures, objecting his
natural Aversion to any Undertaking which was hazardous and requir'd
Application: then would he start some Difficulties, which were of no
other use but to destroy all Suspicion of his having any Understanding
with his Master, and were so far from being weighty enough to discourage
them, that they rather serv'd to excite their Ardour.

Upon the Advice given by _Pinto_, the Duke left _Villa-viciosa_, and
came to _Almada_, a Castle near _Lisbon_, on pretence of visiting it as
he had done the other Fortifications of that Kingdom. His Equipage was
so magnificent, and he had with him such a number of the Nobility and
Gentry, as well as of Officers, that he looked more like a King going to
take possession of a Kingdom, than like the Governour of a Province, who
was viewing the Places and Forts under his Jurisdiction: he was so near
_Lisbon_, that he was under an obligation of going to pay his Devoirs to
the Vice-Queen. As soon as he enter'd the Palace-yard, he found the
Avenues crowded with infinite numbers of People, who press'd forward to
see him pass along; and all the Nobility came to wait upon him, and to
accompany him to the Vice-Queen's. It was a general Holiday throughout
the City, and so great was the Joy of the People, that there seem'd only
a Herald wanting to proclaim him King, or Resolution enough in himself
to put the Crown upon his Head.

But the Duke was too prudent to trust to the uncertain Sallies of an
inconstant People. He knew what a vast difference there was between
their vain Shouts, and that Steddiness which is necessary to support so
great an Enterprize. Therefore after having paid his respects to the
Vice-Queen, and taken leave of her, he return'd to _Almada_, without so
much as going to _Braganza-House_, or passing thro the City, lest he
should encrease the Jealousy of the _Spaniards_, who already seem'd very
uneasy at the Affection which the People had so unanimously express'd
for the Duke.

_Pinto_ took care to make his Friends observe the unnecessary Caution
which his Master us'd, and that therefore they ought not to neglect this
Opportunity, which his Stay at _Almada_ afforded them, to wait upon that
Prince, and to persuade, nay, as tho it were to force him to accept the
Crown. The Conspirators thought the Counsel good, and deputed him to the
Duke to obtain an Audience. He granted them one, but upon condition
there should come three of the Conspirators only, not thinking it safe
to explain himself before a greater Number.

_Miguel d'Almeida_, _Antonio d'Almada_, and _Pedro Mendoza_, were the
three Persons pitched upon; who coming by night to the Prince's, and
being introduc'd into his Chamber, _d'Almada_, who was their Spokesman,
represented in few words the present unhappy State of _Portugal_, whose
Natives, of what Quality or Condition soever, had suffer'd so much from
the unjust and cruel _Castilians_: That the Duke himself was as much, if
not more expos'd than any other to their Treachery; that he was too
discerning not to perceive that _d'Olivarez_'s Aim was his Ruin, and
that there was no other Place of Refuge but the Throne; for the
restoring him to which, he had Orders to offer him the Services of a
considerable Number of People of the first Quality, who would willingly
expose their Lives, and sacrifice their Fortunes for his sake, and to
revenge themselves upon the oppressing _Spaniards_.

He afterwards told them, that the Times of _Charles_ V. and _Philip_ II.
were no more, when _Spain_ held the Ballance of _Europe_ in her hand,
and gave the neighbouring Nations Laws: That this Monarchy, which had
been once so formidable, could scarce now preserve its antient
Territories; that the _French_ and _Dutch_ not only wag'd War against
them, but often overcame 'em; that _Catalonia_ itself employ'd the
greatest part of their Forces; that they scarce had an Army on foot, the
Treasury was exhausted, and that the Kingdom was governed by a weak
Prince, who was himself sway'd by a Minister, abhor'd by the whole
Nation.

He then observ'd what foreign Protection and Alliances they might depend
on, and be assur'd of; most of the Princes of _Europe_ were profess'd
Enemies to the House of _Austria_; the Encouragement _Holland_ and
_Catalonia_ had met with, sufficiently shew'd what might be expected
from that able[B] Statesman, whose mighty Genius seem'd wholly bent upon
the Destruction of the _Spanish_ King; that the Sea was now open, and he
might have free Communication with whom he pleas'd; that there were
scarce any _Spanish_ Garisons left in _Portugal_, they having been drawn
out to serve in _Catalonia_; that there could never be a more favourable
Opportunity of asserting his Right and Title to the Crown, of securing
his Life, his Fortune, and his Liberty, which were at stake, and of
delivering his Country from Slavery and Oppression.

We may easily imagine, that there was nothing in this Speech which could
displease the Duke of _Braganza_; however, unwilling to let them see his
Heart, he answer'd the Deputies in such a manner, as could neither
lessen, or encrease their Hopes. He told them, that he was but too
sensible of the Miseries to which _Portugal_ was reduc'd by the
_Castilians_, nor could he think himself secure from their Treachery;
that he very much commended the Zeal which they shew'd for the Welfare
of their Country, and was in an especial manner oblig'd to them for the
Affection which they bore him in particular; that notwithstanding what
they had represented, he fear'd that matters were not ripe for so
dangerous an Enterprize, whose Consequence, should they not bring it to
a happy Period, would prove so fatal to them all.

Having return'd this Answer, (for a more positive one he would not
return) he caress'd the Deputies, and thank'd them in so obliging a
manner, that they left him, well satisfy'd that their Message was
gratefully receiv'd; but at the same time persuaded, that the Prince
would be no farther concerned in their Design, than giving his content
to the Execution of it, as soon as their Plot should be ripe.

After their Departure, the Duke confer'd with _Pinto_ about the new
Measures which they must take, and then return'd to _Villa-viciosa_; but
not with that inward Satisfaction of Mind which he had hitherto enjoy'd,
but with a Restlessness of Thought, the too common Companion of Princes.

As soon as he arriv'd, he communicated those Proportions, which had been
made him, to the Dutchess his Wife. She was of a _Castilian_ Family,
Sister to the Duke of _Medina Sidonia_, a Grandee of _Spain_, and
Governor of _Andalusia_. During her Childhood, her Mind was great and
heroick, and as she grew up, became passionately fond of Honour and
Glory. The Duke, her Father, who perceived this natural Inclination of
hers, took care to cultivate it betimes, and gave the Care of her
Education to Persons who would swell her Breast with[C] Ambition, and
represent it as the chiefest Virtue of Princes. She apply'd herself
betimes to the Study of the different Tempers and Inclinations of
Mankind, and would by the Looks of a Person judge of his Heart; so that
the most dissembling Courtier could scarce hide his Thoughts from her
discerning Eye. She neither wanted Courage to undertake, nor Conduct to
carry on the most difficult things, provided their End was glorious and
honourable. Her Actions were free and easy, and at the same time noble
and majestick; her Air at once inspir'd Love, and commanded Respect. She
took the _Portuguese_ Air with so much ease, that it seem'd natural to
her. She made it her chief Study to deserve the Love and Esteem of her
Husband; nor could the Austerity of her Life, a solid Devotion, and a
perfect Complaisance to all his Actions, fail of doing it. She neglected
all those Pleasures, which Persons of her Age and Quality usually
relish; and the greatest part of her time was employ'd in Studies, which
might adorn her Mind, and improve her Understanding.

The Duke thought himself compleatly happy in the possession of so
accomplish'd a Lady; his Love could scarce be parallel'd, and his
Confidence in her was entire: He never undertook any thing without her
Advice, nor would he engage himself any farther in a matter of such
consequence, without first consulting with her. He therefore shew'd her
the Scheme of the Revolution; the Names of the Conspirators, and
acquainted her with what had pass'd as well in the Assembly held at
_Lisbon_, as in the Conference he had had with them at _Almada_, and the
Warmth which every one had shown upon this occasion. He told her, That
the Expedition of _Catalonia_ had so incens'd the Nobility, that they
were all resolv'd to revolt, rather than to leave their native Country;
he dreaded, that if he should refuse to lead them on, they would forsake
him, and chuse themselves another Leader. Yet he confess'd, that the
Greatness of the Danger made him dread the Event; that whilst he view'd
the Throne at a distance, the flattering Idea of Royalty was most
agreeable to his Mind, but that now having a nearer Prospect of it, and
of the intervening Obstacles, he was startled; nor could he calmly
behold those Dangers into which he must inevitably plunge himself and
his whole Family, in case of a Discovery: That the People, on whom they
must chiefly depend for the Success, were inconstant, and disheartned by
the least Difficulty: That the Number of Nobility and Gentry which he
had on his side, was not sufficient, unless supported by the Grandees of
the Kingdom; who doubtless, jealous of his Fortune, would oppose it, as
not being able to submit to the Government of one, whom they had all
along look'd upon as their Equal. That these Considerations, as well as
the little Dependance he could make on foreign Assistance, overrul'd his
Ambition, and made him forget the hopes of reigning. But the Dutchess,
whose Soul was truly great, and Ambition her ruling Passion, immediately
declar'd herself in favour of the Conspiracy. She ask'd the Duke,
"Whether in case the _Portuguese_, accepting his Denial, should resolve
to make themselves a Republick, he would side with them, or with the
King of _Spain_?" "With his Countrymen undoubtedly, _he reply'd_; for
whose Liberty he would willingly venture his Life." "And why can you not
do for your own sake, _answer'd she_, what you would do as a Member of
the Commonwealth? The Throne belongs to you, and should you perish in
attempting to recover it, your Fate would be glorious, and rather to be
envy'd than pity'd." After this she urg'd "his undoubted Right to the
Crown; that _Portugal_ was reduc'd to such a miserable State by the
_Castilians_, that it was inconsistent with the Honour of a Person of
his Quality to be an idle Looker-on; that his Children would reproach,
and their Posterity curse his Memory, for neglecting so fair an
Opportunity of restoring them what they ought in justice to have had."
Then she represented the difference between a Sovereign and a Subject,
and the pleasure of ruling, instead of obeying in a servile manner. She
made him sensible, that it would be no such difficult matter to
re-possess himself of the Crown; that tho he could not hope for foreign
Assistance, yet were the _Portuguese_ of themselves able to drive the
_Spaniards_ out of their Country, especially at such a favourable
Juncture as this. In short, so great was her persuasive Art, that she
prevailed upon the Duke to accept the Offer made him, but at the same
time confess'd his Prudence, in letting the Number of the Conspirators
encrease before he join'd with them; nor would she advise him to appear
openly in it, till the Plot was ripe.

Mean while the Court of _Spain_ grew very jealous or him. Those
extraordinary Marks of Joy, which the _Lisbonites_ had shewn at his
coming thither, had very much alarm'd _d'Olivarez_. It was also
whisper'd about, that there were nightly Meetings and secret Assemblies
held at _Lisbon_: So impossible it is, that a Business of such a
consequence should be wholly conceal'd.

[Sidenote: _Octob. 20. 1640._]

Upon this several Councils were held at _Madrid_, in which it was
resolv'd, that the only way to prevent the _Portuguese_ from revolting,
was by taking from them their Leader, in favour of whom it was suppos'd
they intended to revolt. Wherefore _d'Olivarez_ immediately dispatch'd a
Courier to the Duke of _Braganza_, to acquaint him, that the King
desir'd to be inform'd, by his own mouth, of the Strength of every Fort
and Citadel, the Condition of the Sea-Ports, and what Garisons were
plac'd in each of them: to this he added, that his Friends at Court were
overjoy'd at the thoughts of seeing him so soon, and that every one of
them were preparing to receive him with the Respect due to his Quality
and Deserts.

This News thunder-struck the unhappy Prince; he was well assur'd, that
since so many Pretences were made use of to get him into _Spain_, his
Destruction was resolv'd on, and nothing less than his Life could
satisfy them. They had left off Caresses and Invitations, and had now
sent positive Orders, which either must be obey'd, or probably open
Force would be made use of. He concluded, that he was betray'd. Such is
the Fear of those, whose Thoughts are taken up with great Designs, and
who always imagine that the inquisitive World is prying into their
Actions, and observing all their Steps. Thus did the Duke, whose Conduct
had been always greater than his Courage, dread that he had plung'd
himself into inevitable Destruction.

But to gain time enough to give the Conspirators notice of his Danger,
by the Advice of the Dutchess, he sent a Gentleman, whose Capacity and
Fidelity he was before assur'd of, to the Court of _Madrid_, to assure
the _Spanish_ Minister, that he would suddenly wait on the King; but had
at the same time given him private Orders to find out all the Pretences
imaginable for the delaying his Journey, hoping in the mean time to
bring the Conspiracy to Ripeness, and thereby to shelter himself from
the impending Storm.

As soon as this Gentleman arriv'd at _Madrid_, he assur'd the King and
the Duke _d'Olivarez_, that his Master follow'd him. To make his Story
the more plausible, he took a large House, which he furnish'd very
sumptuously, then hir'd a considerable Number of Servants, to whom he
before-hand gave Liveries. In short, he spar'd no Cost to persuade the
_Spaniards_ that his Master would be in a very little time at Court, and
that he intended to appear with an Equipage suitable to his Birth.

Some days after he pretended to have receiv'd Advice that his Master was
fallen sick. When this Pretence was grown stale, he presented a Memorial
to _d'Olivarez_, in which he desir'd that his Master's Precedence in the
Court might be adjusted. He did not in the least question but that this
would gain a considerable time, hoping that the Grandees, by maintaining
their Rights, would oppose his Claims. But these Delays beginning to be
suspected, the first Minister had the thing soon decided, and always in
favour of the Duke of _Braganza_; so earnestly did he desire to see him
once out of _Portugal_, and to have him safe at _Madrid_.

The Conspirators no sooner heard of the Orders which the Duke had
receiv'd, but fearing that he might obey them, deputed _Mendoza_ to know
what he intended to do, and to engage him firmly, if possible, to their
Party. This Gentleman was chosen preferably to any other, because he was
Governor of a Town near _Villa-viciosa_; so that he could hide the real
Intent of his Journey from the _Spaniards_, under the specious Pretence
of Business. He did not dare to go directly to the Prince's House, but
took an opportunity of meeting him in a Forest one morning as he was
hunting; they retir'd together into the thickest part of the Wood, where
_Mendoza_ shew'd him what Danger he expos'd himself to, by going to a
place where all were his Enemies: That by this inconsiderate Action the
Hopes of the Nobility, as well as of the People, were utterly
destroy'd: That a sufficient Number of Gentlemen, who were as able to
serve him, as they were willing to do it, or to sacrifice their Lives
for his sake, only waited for his Consent to declare themselves in his
favour: That now was the very Crisis of his Fate, and that he must this
instant resolve to be _C√¶sar_ or nothing: That the Business would admit
of no longer Delay, lest the Secret being divulg'd, their Designs should
prove abortive. The Duke, convinc'd of the Truth of what was said to
him, told him that he was of his mind, and that he might assure his
Friends, that as soon as their Plot should be ripe, he would put himself
at the head of them.

This Conference ended, _Mendoza_ immediately return'd home, for fear of
being suspected, and wrote to some of the Conspirators that he had been
hunting; "We had almost, _continued he_, lost our Game in the Pursuit,
but at last the Day prov'd a Day of good Sport." Some few Days after
_Mendoza_ return'd to _Lisbon_, and acquainted _Pinto_ that his Master
wanted him, who set out as soon as they had together drawn out a shorter
Scheme to proceed upon. Coming to _Villa-viciosa_, the first thing he
acquainted the Duke with, was the Difference which had lately happen'd
at the Court of _Lisbon_, the Vice-Queen loudly complaining of the
haughty Pride and Insolence of _Vasconcellos_; nor could she any longer
bear that all Business should be transacted by him, whilst she enjoy'd
an empty Title, without any the least Authority. What made her
Complaints the juster, was, that she was really a deferring Princess,
and capable of discharging the Trust which was committed to her
Secretary. But it was the Greatness of her Genius, and her other
extraordinary Deserts, which made the Court of _Spain_ unwilling to let
her have a greater share in the Government. _Pinto_ observ'd, that this
Difference could never have happen'd in a better time, seeing that the
Ministers of _Spain_ being taken up with this Business, would not be at
leisure to pry into his Actions, or to observe the Steps he should take.

The Duke of _Braganza_, since _Mendoza_'s Departure, was fallen into his
wonted Irresolution, and the nearer the Business came to a Crisis, the
more he dreaded the Event: _Pinto_ made use of all his Rhetorick to
excite his Master's Courage, and to draw him into his former Resolution.
Nay, to his Persuasions he added Threatnings; he told him, in spite of
himself, the Conspirators would proclaim him King, and what Dangers must
he run then, when the Crown should be fix'd upon his Head, at a time
when, only for want of necessary Preparation, he was not capable of
preserving it. The Dutchess join'd with this faithful Servant, and
convinc'd the Duke of the Baseness of preferring Life to Honour: he,
charm'd with her Courage, yet asham'd to see it greater than his own,
yielded to their Persuasions.

Mean while, the Gentleman whom he had sent to _Madrid_, wrote daily to
let him know, that he could no longer defer his Journey on any pretence
whatsoever, and that _Olivarez_ refus'd to hear the Excuses which he
would have made. The Duke, to gain a little longer time, order'd the
Gentleman to acquaint the _Spanish_ Minister, that he had long since
been at _Madrid_, had he had Money enough to defray the Expence of his
Journey, and to appear at Court in a manner suitable to his Quality:
That as soon as he could receive a sufficient Sum, he would immediately
set out.

This Business dispatch'd, he consulted with the Dutchess and _Pinto_
about the properest Means of executing their Design: several were
propos'd, but at last this was agreed upon, That the Plot must break out
at _Lisbon_, whose Example might have a good effect upon the other Towns
and Cities of the Kingdom: That the same Day wherein he was proclaim'd
King in the Metropolis, he should be also proclaim'd in every Place
which was under his Dependance; nay, in every Borough and Village, of
which any of the Conspirators were the leading Men, they should raise
the People, so that one half of the Kingdom being up, the other of
course would fall into their Measures, and the few remaining _Spaniards_
would not know on which side to turn their Arms. His own Regiment he
should quarter in _Elvas_, whose Governour was wholly in his Interest.
That as for the manner of their making themselves Masters of _Lisbon_,
Time and Opportunity would be their best Counsellors; however, the
Duke's Opinion was, that they should seize the Palace in the first
place, so that by securing the Vice-Queen, and the _Spaniards_ of Note,
they would be like so many Hostages in their hands, for the Behaviour of
the Governour and Garison of the Citadel, who otherwise might very much
annoy 'em when they were Masters of the Town. After this, the Duke
having assur'd _Pinto_, that notwithstanding any Change of Fortune, he
should still have the same place in his Affection; he sent him to
_Lisbon_ with two Letters of Trust, one for _Almeida_, the other for
_Mendoza_; wherein he conjur'd 'em to continue faithful to their
Promises, and resolutely and courageously to finish what they had begun.

As soon as he arriv'd at _Lisbon_, he deliver'd his Letters to _Almeida_
and _Mendoza_, who instantly sent for _Lemos_ and _Coreo_, whom _Pinto_
had long since engag'd in the Interest of his Master. These were two
rich Citizens, who had gone thro all the Offices of the City, and had
the People of it very much at their command; as they still carry'd on
their Trade, there were a vast Number of poor People daily employ'd by
'em, and whose Hatred to the _Spaniards_ they had still taken care to
encrease, by insinuating that there were new Taxes to be laid upon
several things at the beginning of the next Year. When they observ'd any
one of a fiery Temper, they would take care to discharge him, on
pretence that the _Castilians_ had utterly ruin'd their Trade, and that
they were no longer able to employ them; but their Aim was to reduce
them to Poverty and Want, insomuch that Necessity should oblige them to
revolt: but still would they extend their Charity towards them, that
they might always have them at their service. Besides this, they had
engag'd some of the ablest Merchants and Tradesmen in every part of
_Lisbon_, and promis'd, that if the Conspirators would give 'em warning
over night of the Hour they intended to rise, punctually at that time
they would have half the City up in Arms.

_Pinto_ being thus sure of the Citizens, turn'd his Thoughts to the
other Conspirators: he advis'd them to be ready for the Execution of
their Plot upon the first notice given them; that mean while he would
have them pretend they had some private Quarrel, and engage their
Friends to assist them, for many, he observ'd, were not fit to be
entrusted with so important a Secret, and others could not in cold Blood
behold the Dangers they must go thro, and yet both be very serviceable
when Matters were ripe, and only their Swords wanted.

[Sidenote: _Dec. 1. 1640._]

Finding every body firm in their Resolutions, and impatient to revenge
themselves upon the _Spaniards_, he conferr'd with _Almeida_, _Mendoza_,
_Almada_, and _Mello_, who fix'd upon Saturday, the first of _December_,
for the great, the important Day: Notice was immediately given to the
Duke of _Braganza_, that he might cause himself to be proclaim'd King
the same day in the Province of _Alentejo_, most part of which belong'd
to him. After which they agreed upon meeting once more before the time.

On the Twenty-fifth of _November_, according to their Agreement, they
met at _Braganza-House_, where mustering their Forces, they found that
they could depend upon about One Hundred and Fifty Gentlemen, (most of
them Heads of Families) with their Servants and Tenants, and about Two
Hundred substantial Citizens, who could bring with them a considerable
Number of inferior Workmen.

_Vasconcellos_'s Death was unanimously resolv'd on, as a just Victim,
and which would be grateful to the People. Some urg'd, that the
Archbishop of _Braga_ deserv'd the same Fate, especially considering the
Strength of his Genius, and the Greatness of his Courage; for it was not
to be suppos'd that he would be an idle Looker-on, but would probably be
more dangerous than the Secretary himself could be, by raising all the
_Spaniards_ who were in _Lisbon_, with their Creatures; and that whilst
they were busy in making themselves Masters of the Palace, he, at the
head of his People, might fling himself into the Citadel, or come to the
assistance of the Vice-Queen, to whose Service he was entirely devoted;
and that at such a time as this, Pity was unseasonable, and Mercy
dangerous.

These Considerations made the greatest part of the Assembly consent to
the Prelate's Death; and he had shar'd _Vasconcellos_'s Fate, had not[D]
Don _Miguel d'Almeida_ interpos'd. He represented to the Conspirators,
that the Death of a Man of the Prelate's Character and Station, would
make them odious to the People; that it would infallibly draw the Hatred
of the Clergy, and of the Inquisition in particular, (a People who at
this Juncture were to be dreaded) upon the Duke of _Braganza_, to whom
they would not only give the Names of Tyrant and Usurper, but whom they
would also excommunicate; that the Prince himself would be sorely
griev'd to have the Day stain'd with so cruel an Action; that he himself
would engage to watch him so closely on that Day, that he should not
have an Opportunity of doing any thing which might be prejudicial to the
common Cause. In short, he urg'd so many things in his behalf, that the
Prelate's Life was granted, the Assembly not being able to deny any
thing to so worthy an Advocate.

Nothing now remain'd but to regulate the Order of the March and Attack,
which was agreed upon in this manner: They should divide into four
Companies, which should enter the Palace by four different Ways; so that
all the Avenues to it being stopt, the _Spaniards_ might have no
Communication with, or be able to assist one another: That Don _Miguel
d'Almeida_, with his, should fall on the _German_ Guard, at the Entrance
of the Palace: That _Mello_ Lord _Ranger_, his Brother, and Don _Estevan
d'Acugna_, should attack the Guard, which was always set at a Place
call'd the _Fort_: That the Lord-Chamberlain _Emanuel Saa_, _Teillo de
Menezes_, and _Pinto_, should enter _Vasconcellos_'s Apartment, whom
they must immediately dispatch: That Don _Antonio d'Almada_, _Mendoza_,
Don _Carlos Norogna_, and _Antonio Salsaigni_, should seize the
Vice-Queen, and the _Spaniards_ which were with her, to serve for
Hostages, in case of need. Mean while, some of the Gentlemen, with a few
of the most reputable Citizens, should proclaim Don _John_, Duke of
_Braganza_, King of _Portugal_ throughout the City; and that the People
being rais'd by their Acclamations, they should make use of them to
assist, wherever they found any Opposition. After this they resolv'd to
meet on the first of _December_ in the morning, some at _Almeida_'s,
some at _Almada_'s, and the rest at _Mendoza_'s House, where every Man
should be furnish'd with necessary Arms.

While these things were transacting at _Lisbon_, and that the Duke's
Friends were using all their Endeavours for his Re-establishment, he
receiv'd an Express from _Olivarez_, (who grew very jealous of his
Conduct) with positive Orders to come immediately to _Madrid_; and that
he might have nothing to colour his Delay, he remitted him a Bill upon
the Royal Treasury for Ten Thousand Ducats.

The Commands laid upon him were so plain and positive, that the Duke
could not put off his Journey without justly encreasing his Suspicion.
He plainly foresaw, that if he did not obey those Orders, the Court of
_Madrid_ would take some such Measures as might prove fatal to him, and
wholly destroy their Projection; he would not therefore refuse to obey,
but made part of his Houshold immediately set out, and take the _Madrid_
Road. In the presence of the Courier he gave several Orders relating to
the Conduct of those he left his Deputy-Governours, and in all respects
behav'd himself like a Man who was going a long Journey. He dispatch'd a
Gentleman to the Vice-Queen, to give her notice of his Departure, and
wrote to _Olivarez_, that he would be at _Madrid_ in eight Days time at
farthest; and that he might engage the Courier to report all these
things, he made him a considerable Present, under pretence of rewarding
him for his expeditious Haste, in bringing him Letters from the King,
and his first Ministers. At the same time he let the Conspirators know
what new Orders he had receiv'd from Court, that they might see the
Danger of deferring the Execution of their Design; but they were scarce
in a Capacity of assisting him, an Accident having happen'd, which had
almost broken all their Measures.

There was at _Lisbon_ a Nobleman, who on all Occasions had shewn an
immortal Hatred to the _Spanish_ Government; he never call'd them any
thing but Tyrants and Usurpers, and would openly rail at their unjust
Proceedings, but nothing anger'd him more than the Expedition of
_Catalonia_: _d'Almada_ having taken care to fall often into his
Company, thought there was not a truer-hearted _Portuguese_ in the whole
Kingdom, and that no one would more strenuously labour for their
Liberty. But oh Heaven! how great was his Surprize! when having taken
him aside, and discover'd the whole Conspiracy to him, this base, this
cowardly Wretch, whose whole Courage was plac'd in his Tongue, refus'd
to have any hand in the Business, or to engage himself with the
Conspirators, pretending that their Plot had no solid Foundation: Bold
and adventrous where no Danger was, but fearful and daunted as soon as
it appear'd. "Have you, _said he to_ Almada, Forces enough to undertake
so great a thing? Where is your Army to oppose the Troops of _Spain_,
who upon the first News of the Revolt will enter the Kingdom? What
Grandees have you at your head? Can they furnish you with Money
sufficient to defray the Expence of a Civil War? I fear, _continued he_,
that instead of revenging yourselves on the _Spaniards_, and freeing
_Portugal_ from Slavery, you will utterly ruin it, by giving the
_Spaniards_ a specious Pretence for doing what they have been so long
endeavouring at."

_D'Almada_, who expected nothing less than such an Answer, and being
very much troubled at his having entrusted the Secret to a Man, who in
all probability would betray it, without replying drew his Sword, and
coming up to the other, his Eyes sparkling with Rage; "Base Wretch,
_said he_, by thy deceitful Words thou hast drawn a Secret from me, with
which thou must take my Life, or by the Loss of thine atone for thy
Treachery." The other, who had always thought it safest to avoid the
nearest Danger, at the sight of _d'Almada_'s naked Sword, promis'd to do
any thing. He offer'd to sign the Conspiracy, and found weighty Reasons
to destroy his former Objections; he swore that he would bury the Secret
in his Heart, and endeavour'd all he could to persuade _Almada_, that
it was neither want of Courage, or Hatred to the _Spaniards_, which had
at first made him averse to what he had propos'd.

Notwithstanding his Oaths and Promises, _d'Almada_ could not be
thoroughly satisfy'd of this Man's Fidelity; he took care, without
losing sight of him, to let the others know what had happen'd. A general
Consternation immediately spread itself amongst them, and they fear'd,
that the Prospect of the Danger which he must share, or the Hope of a
Reward, would make this Wretch betray them. Upon this they resolv'd to
defer the Execution of their Project, and forc'd _Pinto_ to write to his
Master, to put off his being proclaim'd in his Country, till he should
hear further from them. But _Pinto_, who knew how dangerous it was to
defer such a thing, tho but for a Day, at the same time sent him another
Letter, in which he desir'd him to take no notice of his first, seeing
that it was only the Effect of a panick Fear, which had seiz'd the
Conspirators, and which would be over long before the Express arriv'd.

Nor was this crafty Man at all deceiv'd; for the next Day finding every
thing still and quiet, and the Person who caus'd the Alarm making fresh
Promises of Secrecy, they concluded that either he had arm'd his Mind
with a generous Resolution of assisting them, or was afraid of
impeaching so many Persons of Quality; and therefore they determin'd to
proceed to Execution on the appointed Day. But another Adventure
happen'd, which disquieted 'em as much as the former.

There were always in the Palace several of the Conspirators, walking up
and down like Courtiers out of Place, whose Business it was to observe
what was done within; but on the Evening of the last of _November_, they
came in a Fright to their Companions, to tell them that _Vasconcellos_
(by whose Death they were to begin the mighty Work) was just gone on
board a Yacht, and had cross'd the _Tagus_. Who but Conspirators would
have taken notice of so indifferent a thing? For a thousand Reasons, in
which they were not concern'd, might have made him go on the other side
of the Water; but they immediately concluded, that this artful
Statesman, who had always his Spies abroad, had discover'd their Plot,
and was about to bring into _Lisbon_ those Soldiers which were quarter'd
in the Villages on the other side of the River. Death, in its most
ghastly Shape, appear'd to them, and they fancy'd that they already felt
the cruellest Torments which could be inflicted. Some were resolving to
fly into _Africa_, others into _England_; and all of them spent the
first part of the Night in the greatest Disquiet imaginable, between the
Hopes of Life and Fear of Death. But about the middle of the Night their
Apprehensions vanish'd; for some who had been sauntring about the Port,
to endeavour to discover the Secretary's Design, came and brought them
the welcome News, that _Vasconcellos_ had been only diverting himself
upon the Water, and that he was return'd, with the Musick playing before
him. A sudden Joy succeeded to their Grief, and about an hour after,
being inform'd that every thing was quiet in the Palace, and every body
bury'd in a profound Sleep, they return'd home to enjoy a little Rest;
that they might be fitter for the Morning's Work.

It was very late, or rather very early, when they parted, and within
some few hours of their appointed time, and yet an Accident happen'd
within those few hours, which had almost betray'd them; so dangerous and
uncertain are Enterprizes of this nature, whilst there are Men, whom
Hopes of Gain, or Fear of Punishment, can work upon to betray their
Fellows. Don _George Mello_, Brother to the Lord _Ranger_, lodg'd at a
Relation's House, in the furthest Suburbs of _Lisbon_. This Gentleman
thought, that now the time was come in which the Conspiracy would break
out, and there was no necessity of hiding it any longer from this
Relation, whom he had reason to believe was his Friend, as also one that
might be serviceable to them, and who otherwise would for ever reproach
him with having distrusted him as one not true to the Interest of his
Country. Wherefore as soon as he came home, he went into his Chamber,
and there reveal'd the Secret, desiring him to join in the Enterprize
with so many Persons of Quality, and to behave himself as a _Portuguese_
ought to do upon such an occasion. The other, surpriz'd at the
Strangeness of this News, affected a seeming Joy for the approaching
Liberty of his Country, thank'd _Mello_ for the Confidence he repos'd in
him, and assur'd him, that he accounted himself happy in having an
opportunity of exposing his Life in so just and glorious a Cause.

Upon this _Mello_ retir'd to his Chamber, to lay himself down to sleep,
but scarce was he got thither, when he began seriously to reflect upon
what he had been doing, and could not but think himself guilty of a very
inconsiderate Action, in putting the Lives of so many Persons of Quality
in the power of one, of whose Principles he was not overwell assur'd;
then began he to fancy, that he had observ'd something of Fear in the
Countenance of the Person, at the time when he was advising him to share
the Danger of the Undertaking.

Full of these Reflections, he could not lay him down to rest, but was
walking in great Disorder about his Chamber, when he thought he
over-heard a kind of whispering Noise. Opening his Window softly, to see
if any body was in the Street, he could perceive a Servant holding his
Relation's Horse, and himself ready to mount. Enrag'd at this, he
snatch'd his Sword, and hastening down stairs, seiz'd his Kinsman, and
ask'd him whither he was going at this unseasonable time. The other
would have forg'd an Excuse, and was hammering out a Lye, but _Mello_
holding his Point to his Breast, threaten'd to kill him, if he did not
immediately go in again; then order'd he the Keys of the House to be
brought him, and having fasten'd all the Doors himself, he retir'd with
his Kinsman, nor would he lose sight of him till it was time to go to
the Rendevouz, to which he carried him.

But now the Morning dawn'd, that was to decide whether the Duke of
_Braganza_ should be the King and Deliverer of his Country, or be
accounted a Rebel and Traitor.

Betimes in the Morning the Conspirators met at the appointed Places,
where they were to be furnish'd with Arms. They all appear'd with so
much Resolution and Courage, that they rather seem'd marching to a
certain Victory, than to an uncertain Enterprize. But what is very much
to be admir'd at, is, that amongst such a Number of Nobility, Gentry,
Citizens, nay Priests, not one should falsify his Word, or break his
Promise, tho their Interests in the Event were very different; but they
all seem'd as impatient for the important Moment, as if each there had
been the Contriver of the Scheme, or at the Head of the Enterprize; or
rather, as if the Crown was to have been the Reward of each individual
Man's Labour. Several Ladies also made themselves famous on that Day.
But the noble Behaviour of Donna _Philippa de Villenes_ ought never to
be forgotten, who with her own hands arm'd both her Sons; and giving
them their Swords, "Go, my Children, _said she_, put an end to a
Tyrant's Power, revenge yourselves on your Enemies, free your Country,
and be assur'd, that if Success does not crown your Undertaking, your
Mother never will live to see the cruel Fate of so many brave and
deserving Patriots."

Every one being arm'd, they made the best of their way towards the
Palace, most of them in Litters, that they might conceal their Number
and their Arms. There they divided into four Companies, and waited with
impatience till the Palace-Clock struck Eight; that, and the firing of a
Pistol, being the appointed Signal. Never did time seem so long; they
fear'd that their being at that Place so early, and in such a Number,
might make the Secretary jealous of their Design: but at last the
long-expected Hour struck, and _Pinto_ firing a Pistol, they rush'd
forward to execute their bold Design.

Don _Miguel d'Almeida_, with those that accompany'd him, fell upon the
_German_ Guard, who were so far from expecting any Attack, that they
were sitting very carelessly, few of them having their Arms in hand; so
that they were cut to pieces, without scarce making any resistance.

The Lord _Ranger_, with his Brother _Mello_, and Don _Estevan d'Acugna_,
fell on the _Spaniards_ who kept Guard at a Place before the Palace,
call'd the _Fort_. These Nobles, followed by most of the Citizens who
were engag'd in the Conspiracy, fell upon the _Castilians_ Sword in
hand, and fought most resolutely; but no one behav'd himself more
bravely than one of the City Priests: this Reverend Man, with a Crucifix
in one hand, and a Sword in the other, appear'd at the head of his
Party, and encourag'd the People, both by his Words and his Example, to
cut their Enemies in pieces. The _Spaniards_, aw'd at the sight of so
religious an Object, neither durst offend him, nor defend themselves,
but fled before him. In short, after some small Resistance, the Officer
of the Guard, willing to save his own Life, was forc'd to cry out with
the rest, _Long live the Duke of_ Braganza, _King of_ Portugal!

_Pinto_ having forced his way into the Palace, march'd at the head of
those, who were to enter _Vasconcellos_'s Apartment, so undauntedly, and
with so little concern, that meeting with an Acquaintance, who,
surpriz'd and frighted, ask'd him, whither he was going with such a
Number of arm'd Men, and what they design'd to do; "Nothing, _said he
smiling_, but change our Master, rid you of a Tyrant, and give
_Portugal_ their rightful King."

Entring the Secretary's Apartment, the first Person they met with was
the[E] _Civil Corregidor_; who, thinking that the Noise he heard
proceeded from some private Quarrel, would have interpos'd his
Authority, but hearing a Cry of _Long live the Duke of_ Braganza, _&c._
thought he was in honour oblig'd to cry out _Long live the King of_
Spain _and_ Portugal: but he lost his Life for his ill-tim'd Loyalty,
one of the Conspirators immediately shooting him thro the Head.

_Antonio Correa_, first Clerk of the Secretary's Office, ran out to know
the Occasion of this Tumult. This was the Man who was employ'd in
oppressing the People, and who, after the Example of his Master, treated
the Nobility of the Kingdom with Scorn and Contempt; therefore as soon
as he appear'd, Don _Antonio de Menezes_ plung'd his Sword into his
Bosom. But the Blow not ending either his Life or Pride, and thinking
that they had mistaken him, he turn'd towards _Menezes_, his Eyes
sparkling with Rage and Indignation, and, in a passionate manner, cry'd
out, _Villain! darest thou strike me?_ But _Menezes_, without answering,
redoubled his Blows; and the other, having receiv'd four or five Stabs,
fell down: However, none of the Wounds prov'd mortal, and he escap'd at
that time, to lose his Life afterwards in an ignominious manner, by the
hands of the common Hangman.

This Business had stop'd the Conspirators, but as soon as _Correa_ fell,
they all rush'd forwards towards _Vasconcellos_'s Apartment. There was
with him, at that time, Don _Garcez Palleia_, a Captain of Foot; who
seeing so many arm'd Men, immediately concluded, that their Design was
to butcher the Secretary. And altho' he was under no manner of
Obligation to that Minister, yet he thought himself in honour oblig'd to
lend him what Assistance he could; wherefore standing at the Door, with
his Sword in hand, he barr'd that Passage: but one of the Conspirators
running him thro' the Arm, and several, who were unwilling to give him
fair play, pressing forward, he was glad to make his Escape, by leaping
out of a Window.

Upon this all the Company, that was with _Pinto_, enter'd the Chamber at
once, and sought _Vasconcellos_; they overturn'd the Bed and Tables,
broke open the Trunks, and every one was desirous of giving him the
first Blow; yet, spite of their Endeavour, they could not find him, and
they began to fear that he had made his Escape: but at last an old
Maid-Servant being threaten'd with Death, unless she would tell where
her Master was; and seeing the uplifted Swords, pointed to a Press which
was made within the Wall, and in which they found the Secretary bury'd
under a heap of Papers.

So great was his fear of Death, which he saw surrounding him on every
side, that it prevented his Speech. Don _Roderigo de Saa_, Lord
Chamberlain, was the Man who kill'd him, by shooting him through the
Head with a Pistol; after which several of the Conspirators stabb'd him,
then threw him out of the Window, crying, _Liberty! Liberty! The Tyrant
is dead! Long live Don_ John _King of_ Portugal!

The Noise which all this had made, had drawn a vast number of People to
the Palace-Court, who seeing the Secretary's Body thrown out, shouted in
a most joyful manner; then rushing upon the Carcase, they mangled it,
every one being eager to give him a Stab, thinking that, thro his sides,
they wounded Tyranny.

Thus perish'd _Miguel Vasconcellos_, a _Portuguese_ by Birth, but by
Inclination a _Spaniard_, and an Enemy to his Country. He had an
excellent Genius for Business, was crafty, politick, nor could any Man
apply himself closer to it than he did. He was always inventing new
ways of extorting Money from the People, was unmerciful, inexorable, and
cruel, without the least regard to Friend or Relation; so fix'd, that
after he had taken a Resolution, no one could byass his Temper; and so
harden'd, that he never knew what the Stings of Conscience were. He had
a Soul that was not capable of relishing any pleasure, but that of
hoarding up Money; so that he left vast Sums behind him, part of which
the People plunder'd, being willing to repay themselves, in some
measure, that which had been extorted from them.

_Pinto_, without loss of time, march'd directly to join the other
Conspirators, who were to make themselves Masters of the Palace, and to
seize the Vice-Queen; he found that the Business was already done, and
that Success had every where crown'd their Undertakings. Those who were
appointed for that Expedition, came directly up to her Chamber, and the
furious Mob, who follow'd them, threatning to set her Apartment on fire,
if the Door was not immediately open'd; the Vice-Queen thinking by her
Presence to pacify the Nobility, and awe the People, came out, attended
by her Maids of Honour, and the Archbishop of _Braga_; and addressing
herself to the chief Conspirators, "I own, Gentlemen, _said she_, that
the Secretary justly deserv'd your Hatred and Indignation; his Cruelty
and his haughty Insolence were intolerable, nor can his Death be charg'd
upon you as a Crime, since you have only deliver'd yourselves from an
oppressing Minister: But cannot his Blood satisfy you? Or what other
Victim would you sacrifice to your Resentment? Think seriously, that
altho' his illegal Conduct may excuse this Insurrection, yet should you
any longer continue in Arms, Rebellion will be laid at your doors, and
you will put it out of my power to make your Peace with the King."

Don _Antonio de Menezes_ answer'd, and assur'd her, "That so many
Persons of Quality had not taken up Arms to murder a Wretch, who ought
to have lost his Life by the hands of the common Hangman; but that their
Design was to restore the Crown to the Duke of _Braganza_, to whom it
lawfully belong'd, and which the King of _Spain_ had unjustly usurp'd;
and that they were all ready to sacrifice their Lives in so glorious a
Cause." She was about to reply, and to interpose the King's Authority;
but _d'Almeida_, who fear'd that such a Speech might have a dangerous
effect upon the People, or at least cool their Courages, interrupted
her, saying, "That _Portugal_ acknowledg'd no other King but the Duke of
_Braganza_." Upon which the People shouted again, crying, _Long live
Don_ John, _King of_ Portugal!

The Vice-Queen believing that her Presence might be of service in the
City, and have a good effect upon the People every where, where the
Conspirators were not present, was going in haste down stairs, but Don
_Carlos Norogna_ stopp'd her, desiring that she would retire to her own
Apartment, assuring her that she should be treated with as much Respect
as if she still had the supreme Command in the Kingdom; but told her
that it would be dangerous for so great a Princess to expose herself to
the Insults of a furious People, who were jealous of their Liberties,
and enflam'd with Thirst of Revenge. The Queen easily understood the
meaning of his words, and found that she was their Prisoner. Enrag'd at
this, "And what can the People do to me?" _cry'd she_. "Nothing, Madam,
_reply'd_ Norogna _in a passion_, but fling your Highness out of the
Window."

The Archbishop of _Braga_ hearing this Answer, grew furious, and
snatching a Sword from one of the Soldiers who stood next him, he flew
towards _Norogna_, resolving to revenge the Vice-Queen, and had
certainly met with Death, the just Reward of his Rashness, had not Don
_Miguel d'Almeida_ laid hold of him, and embracing him, begg'd him to
consider what Danger he expos'd himself to, telling him that he was
already hated enough by the Conspirators; nor had he found it an easy
Task to obtain a Promise of them that they would spare his Life, why
then would he urge them by an Action, which would not only be
unprofitable to his Cause, but which also so highly misbecame his
Character. The Prelate, convinc'd of the Truth of what his Friend said,
was obliged to dissemble his Anger; however, he hoped that he should
meet with some favourable Opportunity of revenging himself on _Norogna_,
and doing something for the service of _Spain_, to whose Interest he was
entirely devoted.

The rest of the _Spaniards_ who were in the Palace, were made Prisoners
by the other Conspirators: Amongst these were the Marquiss of _Puebla_,
Major-Domo to the Vice-Queen, and elder Brother to the Marquiss _de
Leganez_; Don _Didaco Cardenas_, Lieutenant-General of the Cavalry; Don
_Ferdinand de Castro_, Comptroller of the Navy-Office; the Marquiss _de
Baynetto_, an _Italian_, Gentleman-Usher to the Vice-Queen: with some
Sea-Officers, who lay on shore, and whose Ships were in the Harbour. All
this was done as regularly and as quietly, as if they had been taken up
by an Order from the King of _Spain_, nobody stirring to their
Assistance, and they not being able to defend themselves, most of them
having been seiz'd in their Beds.

This done, Don _Antonio de Salsaigni_, follow'd by a Crowd of Friends,
and an innumerable Multitude of People, went up into the Hall, where the
Court of Justice was then sitting, and in an elegant Speech laid before
them the present Happiness of _Portugal_, who had restor'd their own
lawful King; he told them, that Tyranny was now no more, and that the
Laws, which had been long slighted and neglected, should henceforward
take their regular Course. This Speech was applauded by the whole Court,
and they chang'd the Title of their Decrees, which they no longer made
in the Name of the King of _Spain_, but in the Name of Don _John_, King
of _Portugal_.

Whilst _Salsaigni_ was thus persuading the high Court of Justice to
adhere to the Duke of _Braganza_'s Interest, Don _Gaston Coutingno_ was
taking out of Prison those who had been thrown into it by the Cruelty of
the _Spanish_ Minister. These unhappy Wretches, who had all along been
persuaded, that they should end their Lives in their dismal Dungeons,
unless taken out to be led to a cruel Death; seeing themselves now at
liberty, and their Country in a fair way of being freed, and resolving
to suffer any thing, rather than to return to their dark Prisons, form'd
a Body no less formidable than that of the Conspirators, and who were as
fully resolv'd to set the Duke of _Braganza_ on the Throne.

But in the midst of this general Joy, _Pinto_, with the rest of the
Leaders, were under great Apprehensions: The _Spaniards_ were yet
Masters of the Citadel, from whence they could easily burn and destroy
the Town; besides which, the Port was open to the _Spanish_ Fleet:
therefore thinking that they had done nothing till they had taken that
Place, they went up to the Vice-Queen, and desir'd her to sign a Warrant
to the Governour, by virtue of which he should be oblig'd to give them
possession of the Citadel.

She, far from granting what they ask'd, upbraided them as Rebels and
Traitors, and with Indignation ask'd them, Whether they had a mind to
make her an Accomplice? But _d'Almada_, who knew how dangerous it was to
leave the Enemies any longer in that Fort, and being provok'd at the
Vice-Queen's Denial, his Eyes sparkling with Rage, swore violently, that
if she did not sign the Warrant, he would forthwith put every one of the
_Spaniards_ to death, whom they had taken in the Palace.

The poor Princess, frightened with these Threats, and unwilling to be
the Occasion of the Death of so many Persons of Quality, was obliged to
comply, thinking at the same time that the Governour knew his Duty too
well, to obey an Order, which he might be assur'd was sign'd by
Compulsion; but she was very much mistaken in her Conjecture, for Don
_Lewis del Campo_, the _Spanish_ Governour, was a Man of no Resolution
at all, and seeing the Conspirators coming arm'd towards the Citadel,
and all the People of the Town following them, who threaten'd to cut him
and his Garison in pieces, unless he immediately surrender'd, was glad
to see the Warrant, and have so fair an Excuse for his Cowardice;
wherefore he immediately obey'd the Order, and gave up the Fort.

Proud of having dispatch'd their Business so happily, the Conspirators
forthwith deputed _Mendoza_ and the Lord _Ranger_ to the Duke of
_Braganza_, to acquaint him with their Success, and assure him, that
nothing was now wanting but the Presence of their King, to compleat the
Happiness of his Subjects.

Notwithstanding their Message, his Presence was not equally coveted by
every body. The Grandees of the Kingdom could not see him rais'd to the
Throne, without being inwardly jealous of his Fortune; and those of the
Nobility, who were not let into the Secret, refus'd as yet to declare
themselves; nay, some went so far as to assure the People, that the Duke
would never approve of so rash an Action, and whose consequence might be
so fatal to them all. Those who were in the _Spanish_ Interest, were in
a strange Consternation, and did not dare so much as stir abroad, lest
they should be sacrific'd by the People, whose Rage was not yet
appeas'd: In short, every body seem'd at an uncertainty, and waited
impatiently for the Resolutions of the Duke of _Braganza_.

But his Friends, who were better acquainted with his Intentions, still
pursued what they had so happily began, and assembled in the Palace, to
give the necessary Orders. The Archbishop was unanimously chosen
President of the Council, and Lord-Lieutenant of _Portugal_ till the
King's Arrival. He would at first have refus'd the Office, declaring
that his opinion was, that they had more need of a good General at their
head, than of a Man of his Character. However, being press'd by the
Assembly to accept the Place, he consented to it, on condition that he
might have the Archbishop of _Braga_ for his Collegue; who, he said, was
well acquainted with the Business, and might be very serviceable to him
during the King's Absence.

This cunning Prelate chose his Brother Archbishop sooner than any other
Man, well knowing that if he did accept it, he made himself an
Accomplice in what he call'd Rebellion, and would be accounted criminal
by the _Spanish_ Minister: Besides which, he would have only had the
Title of one of the Lord-Lieutenants, without any share of the Power.
But if, on the other hand, he refus'd it, he should for ever put him out
of the King's Favour, and make him odious to all the People, who
henceforwards would look on him as an open and profess'd Enemy to his
Country.

The Archbishop of _Braga_ was very sensible of the Snare which was laid
for him, but as he was wholly devoted to the Vice-Queen, and firm to the
_Spanish_ Interest, he refus'd having any thing to do with the
Administration; so that the whole Burden of the publick Affairs fell
upon the Archbishop of _Lisbon_: to ease him of part of which, they gave
him for Assistants Don _Miguel d'Almeida_, _Pedro Mendoza_, and Don
_Antonio d'Almada_.

One of the first Orders which the new Governour gave, was to seize upon
the three _Spanish_ Galloons which were then in the Harbour; upon which
they arm'd a few Barks, and in them went most part of the _Lisbon_
Youth, so desirous were they of shewing their Affection to the King: but
the Galloons were taken without Resistance, the Officers, and the
greatest part of the Ships Crew, having been seiz'd in the Morning
ashore.

That very Evening Couriers were dispatch'd to every Province, to exhort
the People to give thanks for the Recovery of their Liberties, and the
Restoration of the Duke of _Braganza_; with Orders at the same time to
all Governours of Towns, and other Magistrates, to have him proclaim'd
King of _Portugal_, and to take all the _Spaniards_, in their respective
Districts, into custody.

And now they began to prepare every thing at _Lisbon_ for the Reception
of the new King, and the Archbishop sent word to the late Vice-Queen,
that she would very much oblige them, in leaving the Palace where she
was, for he thought the King would want her Apartment, and that he had
prepar'd every thing for her Reception at the Palace of _Xabregas_,
which was at the farther end of the Town. This Princess receiv'd the
Order with a scornful Look, and without answering a word, obey'd it. She
went thro the Street, but without the usual Train of Courtiers and Crowd
of People; there was only the Archbishop of _Braga_ with her, who still
gave her manifest Tokens of his Respect, even now when he expos'd his
Life by so doing.

Mean while the Duke of _Braganza_ continued in the cruel State of
Uncertainty, sometimes flattering himself with the most pleasing Ideas
which a lively Hope can form, and sometimes under the most dismal
Apprehensions which frighten'd Fancy can suggest. The Distance between
_Villa-viciosa_ and _Lisbon_ being thirty Leagues, he could not know
what pass'd in his behalf so soon as he could have wish'd. All that he
knew was, that on this Day his Life and Fortune were at stake. He had at
first resolv'd to have himself proclaim'd at the same time in all the
Towns which were under his Dependance; but his mind chang'd, and he
determin'd to wait for the News of what had pass'd at _Lisbon_, before
he undertook any thing. There still remain'd the Kingdom of _Algarva_,
and the Citadel of _Elvas_, to which he could retire, in case his Party
at _Lisbon_ should fail; nay, he thought he could clear himself of
having any hand in the Conspiracy, especially at a time when the
_Spaniards_ would be glad to believe him innocent.

He had planted several Couriers on the Road to _Lisbon_, and thereby
expected to have an Account of what had pass'd betimes; but he had
waited with impatience all the Day, and the greatest part of the Night,
without hearing any thing, and the next Morning was already near at
hand, when _Mello_ and _Mendoza_, who had rode post from _Lisbon_,
arriv'd. They threw themselves at the Duke's feet, by which Action, as
well as by the Joy which appear'd in their Faces, the Success of their
Undertaking might be better read, than it was possible for them to
express.

They were about to give him an exact Account of every thing, but the
Duke, without hearing a word of what they had to tell him, conducted
them to the Dutchess's Apartment. The two Noblemen saluted her with the
same Respect, as if she had actually been upon the Throne; they assur'd
her of the Good-Wishes and Fidelity of her Subjects: and to shew her
that they acknowledg'd her their Queen, they now gave her the Title of
_Majesty_, whereas the Kings and Queens of _Portugal_ had hitherto been
always call'd their _Highnesses_.

We may easily judge of what pass'd in the Heart of this Royal Pair, if
we consider the Fears and Agitations which they were before in, and to
what Grandeur they were now rais'd. Nothing but Shouts of Joy were heard
throughout the Palace, the happy News soon spread, and the same Morning
the King was proclaim'd in all those Places, where it should have been
done the Day before; _Mello_ and _Alphonso_ also had him proclaim'd at
_Elvas_. The People came in Crouds to pay their Homage to the new King;
which, tho in a confus'd manner, was no less agreeable to him, than what
he afterwards receiv'd in all the formal Pomp of Ceremony.

The King immediately set out for _Lisbon_, with the same Equipage which
had been prepar'd for his setting out for _Madrid_. He was accompany'd
by the Marquiss _de Ferreira_, a Relation of his; the Count _de
Vimioso_; and several other Persons of Quality, who were come to wait
upon him to the Capital.

[Sidenote: _Decem. 6._]

The Queen he left at _Villa-viciosa_, knowing that her Presence was
necessary there, to keep the Provinces in awe. Every where, upon the
Roads to _Lisbon_, they met with infinite Numbers of People, who crouded
forwards to see the King; who had the satisfaction every where of
hearing the People blessing him, and cursing the _Spaniards_. All the
Nobility, with the whole Court, and the Magistrates of the City, met him
at a great distance from _Lisbon_, and he enter'd the Town amidst the
Acclamations of a joyful People.

That Evening there were Illuminations every where, and Fireworks in
every publick Place; each Citizen in particular had a Bonfire before his
door, which made a _Spaniard_ say, "The Duke of _Braganza_ was a happy
Prince, who had got a whole Kingdom for a Bonfire." Nor was it long
indeed before he was Master of the whole Kingdom, every Town follow'd
the Example of their Capital, and seem'd as if they had a Plot ripe for
Execution. Fresh Couriers every day arriv'd, who brought News of Towns,
and sometimes of whole Provinces, which had driven the _Castilians_ out,
and proclaim'd the Duke of _Braganza_. Nor were many of the _Spanish_
Governours more resolute than the Commander of the Citadel of _Lisbon_;
and whether they wanted Soldiers, Ammunition, or Courage, is uncertain,
but most of them surrender'd, without so much as giving the _Portuguese_
the trouble of firing a Gun. In short, they fled the Kingdom like so
many Criminals who had broke out of Prison; each Man dreaded
_Vasconcellos_'s Fate, and trembled at the sight of an incens'd
Multitude: nor was there a _Spaniard_ left in the whole Kingdom, but
those who were taken into Custody, and all this in less than a
Fortnight's time.

Don _Ferdinand de la Cueva_, Commander of the Citadel of _St. Juan_, at
the Mouth of the _Tagus_, was the only Man who offer'd to make any
resistance, and to preserve the Place for the King his Master. The
Garison was wholly compos'd of _Spaniards_, the Officers brave, and
resolv'd to hold it out to the last; and therefore, as soon as the
_Portuguese_ approach'd them, made a vigorous Defence. They were oblig'd
to besiege it in form; to that end they brought Cannon from _Lisbon_,
and open'd the Trenches before it, which they carry'd as far as the
Counterscarp, spite of the Besieged's continual Fire, and their frequent
Sallies. But the King, who knew that treating with the Commander would
be not only the safest, but the shortest way, made him such advantageous
Proposals, that the Governour could not resist the Temptation; but
dazled with the Prospect of the vast Sum which was offer'd, besides a
Commandry of the _Order of Christ_, and pretending that his Garison was
not strong enough to hold out a Siege, he surrender'd upon Terms, spite
of the chief Officers, who refus'd to sign the Capitulation.

This done, the King thought it best not to defer his Coronation, that he
might thereby confirm his Royalty, and consecrate his Majesty. The
Ceremony was perform'd on the Fifteenth of _December_ with all the
Magnificence imaginable; the Duke _d'Aveiro_, the Marquiss _de
Villareal_, the Duke _de Carmino_, his Son, the Count _de Monsano_, and
all the other Grandees of the Kingdom, being present. The Archbishop of
_Lisbon_, at the head of all the Clergy of his Diocese, and accompany'd
by several other Bishops, met him at the Door of the Cathedral; there he
was solemnly acknowledg'd by the States of the Kingdom their Rightful
and Lawful King: after which every one of them took the Oath of
Allegiance.

Some few Days after the Coronation, the Queen arriv'd at _Lisbon_ with a
sumptuous Equipage and numerous Retinue. All the Court went out of Town
to meet her, and she already had with her all the Officers of her
Houshold. The King himself met her at some distance from the Town. This
Prince omitted nothing which might make her Entry appear magnificent,
and convince the People that he believ'd she had very much contributed
to the placing the Crown upon his Head. Every one observ'd, that
notwithstanding her Fortune was alter'd, yet was not the Queen in the
least chang'd, but behav'd herself as majestically, as if she had been
born to, and was educated for the Possession of a Throne.

       *       *       *       *       *

Such was the Success of this great Enterprize, as happily finish'd, as
it was prudently begun; which may be reckon'd a sort of Miracle,
considering the vast Number of Persons, and the different Quality and
Inclinations of those who were let into the Secret: Nor can it be
accounted for, but from the natural Hatred which the _Portuguese_ had to
a _Spanish_ Government; a Hatred! which took its first Rise from the
frequent Wars which these neighbouring Nations waged against one
another, ever since they had been Monarchies; as well as from their
being both concern'd in the Discovery of the _Indies_, and the frequent
Debates which they had concerning their Commerce; these at last grew
into an inveterate Hatred, which was now encreas'd by the Tyranny of
_Spain_.

The News of the Revolution soon reach'd the Court of _Spain_.
_D'Olivarez_ was almost driven to Despair at the hearing it; he saw his
own Project miscarry, and Ruin threatning his Country, which might have
been easily prevented, but could not now be remedy'd. Nor had _Spain_
any need of acquiring new Enemies, the _French_ and _Dutch_ Troops
already employ'd their utmost Forces, with much ado they resisted their
combin'd Strength; and the Revolt of _Catalonia_, he fear'd, might
invite other Provinces to do the like.

There was no one now in the Court of _Madrid_ ignorant of the News, but
the King himself; every one thought that he ought to be inform'd of it,
yet no one dar'd undertake the ungrateful Task, for fear of incurring
the Minister's Displeasure, whose implacable Temper they knew too well,
to hope that he would ever forgive an Offence of this nature. At last
the Duke, seeing that the Story was too well known to be any longer
conceal'd from the King, and fearing that some of his Enemies, either to
ingratiate or revenge themselves, should tell it in such a manner, that
the whole Fault would seem to fall upon him, he resolv'd to be himself
the Messenger, and coming up to the King, with a serene Look, and a Face
on which a dissembled Joy sat confess'd, "I wish your Majesty Joy," _said
he_, "of a noble Dutchy, and a fine Estate, which are lately fallen to
you." "How _Olivarez!" answer'd the King_; "what do you mean?" "Mean!"
_reply'd the Minister_; "why the Duke of _Braganza_ is run mad, the Mob
have proclaimed him King of _Portugal_, and he has accepted the Title;
so that now all he has is confiscated, and you have a good Pretence to
rid yourself of the whole Family: Henceforwards you may reign King of
_Portugal_, nor fear that any one will dispute your Title to that
Kingdom."

As weak a Prince as _Philip_ was, he easily comprehended the meaning of
these words; but as he could no longer see but thro his Minister's Eyes,
he only told him, That he must take care betimes to put an end to a
Rebellion, whose Consequence might otherwise prove dangerous.

[Sidenote: _Jan. 28. 1644._]

Mean while the King of _Portugal_ took all the necessary Measures to
confirm his new Authority. As soon as he came to _Lisbon_, he nam'd
Governours for every Town of _Portugal_, as much distinguish'd for
their Fidelity to him, as for their Experience and approv'd Valour; who
immediately, with what Soldiers they could get together, went to take
possession of their Command, and to put the Place in a posture of
Defence. At the same time recruiting Commissions were given out; and the
Solemnity of his Coronation being over, he call'd together the States of
the Kingdom: in which, to prevent all the Doubts and Scruples which
might rise in the Minds of the People, his Pretensions to the Crown were
examin'd, and by a solemn Decree of the States he was acknowledg'd
Rightful and Lawful King, as being descended from Prince _Edward_, Son
to King _Emanuel_; whereas the King of _Spain_ was only descended from a
Daughter of the same King _Emanuel_, who also by the Fundamental Laws of
_Portugal_ was excluded the Succession, having espous'd a foreign
Prince.

In this Assembly the King declar'd, that he would content himself with
his own Estate, and that the usual Royal Revenue should be apply'd to
the defraying of the extraordinary Expences, and paying the Debts of the
Kingdom. And the better to ingratiate himself with the People, he took
off all the Taxes which the oppressing _Spaniards_ had laid upon them.

To all the considerable Offices and Employments he promoted those of the
Conspirators, whose Birth and Capacity might give them just Pretensions
to it, and who had shewn the greatest Desire of raising him to the
Throne. In this Promotion no notice was taken of _Pinto_; the King did
not think his Royalty sufficiently confirm'd, to venture at raising one
of his Servants, and whose Extraction was but mean. However, the Prince
was not in the least unmindful of his Service, and without having the
Title of a Minister of State, he had the Authority of one; so great was
his Influence over his Master, and such entire Confidence did he repose
in him.

Having given all the necessary Orders within the Kingdom, he resolv'd to
assure himself of some foreign Assistance in case of necessity, as well
by making strict Alliances with all the Enemies of _Spain_, as by
raising them new ones. To this end he endeavour'd to persuade the Duke
of _Medina Sidonia_, Governour of _Andalusia_, and his Brother-in-law,
to follow his Example, shake off the _Spanish_ Yoke, and make himself an
independent Prince. The Marquiss _Daiamonti_, a _Spanish_ Nobleman, and
related to the Queen of _Portugal_, was to negotiate this Business, the
Success of which will be seen in the Sequel of this History.

The King of _Portugal_ made a League offensive and defensive with the
_Dutch_; _France_ promis'd him its Protection, and he sent Ambassadors
to all the Courts of _Europe_, that his Title might be acknowledg'd by
their Princes. But the King of _Spain_ was so destitute of Men,
_Catalonia_ employing all his Forces, that he did very little all that
Campaign for the Recovery of _Portugal_, and even what he did undertake
met with no Success.

Some little time after this, News was brought that _Goa_, and all those
other Places which belong'd to _Portugal_, whether in the _Indies_,
_Africa_, or in _Peru_, had follow'd the Example of their _European_
Masters, and revolted from the _Spaniards_. Thus was the King flatter'd
with the Prospect of a happy Reign, and rejoic'd to see Peace and
Tranquillity preserv'd within his Kingdom, whilst his Arms met with
Success abroad; little suspecting the Danger which threaten'd his Life
and Crown, both which he had almost lost by a cursed Conspiracy, which
was form'd even in the midst of that Prince's Court.

The Archbishop of _Braga_, as has before been observ'd, was wholly
devoted to the King of _Spain_, during whose Reign in _Portugal_ he had
had a great share in the Ministry. He now plainly saw, that he must
never hope for any Preferment, unless the _Spanish_ Government could be
again introduc'd into that Kingdom; besides, he fear'd that the new
King, who out of a tender regard to his Character, had not had him put
into Prison with the other _Spaniards_, might alter his Mind, and seeing
his Authority once confirm'd, and dreading no longer the Danger of
incensing the People, or provoking the Inquisition, might make him share
the Fate of those, whose Courage or Politicks 'twas thought might prove
prejudicial to the new King's Government, and who had all been depriv'd
of their Liberty. But the chief Motive which induc'd him to undertake
something for their Cause, was his Affection to the late Vice-Queen:
with impatience he beheld that Princess under Confinement, especially in
a Place where he thought it was her Right to rule; and his Rage was
violently increas'd by the Orders which were given her Guards to admit
neither the Prelate, nor any other Person of Quality, the King having
been inform'd that she endeavour'd to infuse Sentiments of Rebellion
into all those _Portuguese_ who went to visit her; and therefore thought
fit to deprive her of that Liberty, which she so palpably abus'd. As
just and as necessary as this Proceeding was, the Archbishop call'd it
cruel and tyrannick; and as he had some Notions of Gratitude, believ'd
himself under an Obligation of doing something for the Liberty of a
Princess, who had done so much for him. The remembrance of her past
Kindness enflam'd his Soul with Anger, and made him resolve to embrace
any Opportunity whatsoever of revenging himself on her Enemies, and
delivering her out of their hands. But as he plainly saw it would be
impossible either to surprize or corrupt her Guards, he could not think
of any surer way than going directly to the Fountain-head, and by the
Death of the King to restore her Liberty and Authority both at once.

Being fully confirm'd in this Resolution, he began to think of the
speediest Means of putting it in execution, well knowing that he should
not long enjoy the Place of President of the Palace, which was not as
yet taken from him. He plainly saw that it was in vain to follow the
King's Measures, by endeavouring to win the People, and make them join
with him; their Hatred to the _Spaniards_ being too deeply rooted in
their Hearts. The Nobility, he was assur'd, wou'd not assist him, since
by their means the Crown was placed upon the Duke of _Braganza_'s Head:
he could therefore only depend upon the Grandees, who with envy beheld
one that had been their Equal, upon the Throne. The first thing he did,
was to assure himself of _Olivarez_'s Protection and Assistance: after
which, he began to work upon the Marquiss of _Villareal_; to whom he
represented, that the new King was timorous and diffident, for which
reason he sought all opportunities of ruining his Family, lest he should
leave a Subject who was capable of disputing the Crown with his
Successor: That he and the Duke _d'Aveiro_, who were both of the Royal
Blood, were not thought worthy of any Office or Employment; whilst all
Places of Trust were fill'd by a company of factious and seditious
People: That with indignation the People saw how little he was valued,
and were very much troubled to think that a Person of his Quality and
Capacity must spend his time at a Country-Seat, and in an inglorious
Ease: That one of his Birth and Estate was too great to be the Subject
of so petty a Prince as the King of _Portugal_: That he had lost a
Master in the King of _Spain_, who only was capable of bestowing such
Employments on him as he deserv'd, by reason of the many Kingdoms of
which he was Sovereign, and over which he must establish Governours.

Seeing that this Discourse made an impression on the Mind of the
Marquiss, he went so far as to assure him, that he had Orders from the
King of _Spain_ to promise him the Viceroyalty of _Portugal_, as a
Reward of his Loyalty, in case he would assist him in his Design of
recovering that Kingdom.

Notwithstanding what the Archbishop promis'd, the thing was very far
from his Heart; his chief Aim being to restore the Dutchess of _Mantua_
to her Liberty and former Authority: for the compassing of which, he
thought it very lawful to promise what he never intended to perform; and
he knew that ambitious Motives were the likeliest to engage the Marquiss
_de Villareal_, upon whom his fair Speeches had at last such an effect,
that he yielded to his Persuasions, and promis'd that he, with his Son
the Duke of _Camino_, would be at the head of the Enterprize.

This Prelate being thus assur'd of these two Princes, made it his next
business to engage the Grand Inquisitor, who was his intimate Friend,
and than whom no one could be more necessary in carrying on their great
Design; seeing that by his means he should also prevail upon all the
Officers belonging to the Inquisition, a People more to be dreaded by
honest Men than Rogues, and who bear a great sway amongst the
_Portuguese_. He endeavour'd at first to alarm his Conscience, by
reminding him of the Oath of Allegiance which he had taken to the King
of _Spain_, and which he ought not to break in favour of an usurping
Tyrant; but finding the Inquisitor a true Churchman, over whom Interest
had a greater sway than Conscience, he told him that he must join in the
Plot, if he hoped to keep his Place much longer, for that the new King
made it his business to give all the Employments to Persons whose
Fidelity he could depend upon.

After this, he spent several Months in encreasing the Number of
Conspirators, the chief of which were the Commissary _de la Crusada_;
the Count _d'Armamar_, Nephew to the Archbishop; the Count _de
Ballerais_; Don _Augustin Emanuel_; _Antonio Correa_, that Clerk of
_Vasconcellos_, to whom _Menezes_ had given divers Stabs on the first
Day of the Revolution; _Laurento Pidez Carvable_, Keeper of the Royal
Treasury; with several others, who were the Creatures of the _Spanish_
Ministers, to whom they ow'd their Fortunes and their Places, and which
they could not hope to keep long, unless by once more introducing the
_Spanish_ Government.

There were also a vast number of _Jews_ who were concern'd in the Plot,
and who had long liv'd at _Lisbon_ in an outward Profession of the
Christian Faith. These had lately offer'd the King a vast Sum of Money,
if he would free them from the Persecution of the Inquisitors, and let
them have their Synagogues at _Lisbon_; but the Prince rejected their
Offer, and deny'd their Petition. This had thrown the chief of them into
a great Consternation, for appearing at the head of the Petitioners,
they had made themselves known, and thereby expos'd themselves to all
the Torments which the Inquisition could invent.

With these the Archbishop took care to get acquainted, and taking
advantage of the Confusion they were in, promis'd them his Protection,
which was not to be despis'd, since he had such an Influence over the
Grand Inquisitor; but insinuated at the same time, that they were in
danger of being banish'd _Portugal_ by the King, who affected very much
to be thought a true and pious Catholick: and at the same time promis'd
in the Name of the King of _Spain_, that if they would be instrumental
to his Restoration, they should have Liberty of Conscience, and Leave
openly to profess their Religion.

So violent was the Passion of the Archbishop, that he was not asham'd to
make use of the profess'd Enemies of _Jesus Christ_, to drive a
_Christian_ Prince from a Throne, which rightfully belong'd to him; and
this was perhaps the first time that ever the Inquisition and Synagogue
went hand in hand together.

Several Schemes were propos'd, but at last this, which was drawn by the
Archbishop, and approv'd of by the first Minister of _Spain_, was agreed
upon; That the _Jews_ should set fire to the four Corners of the Palace
on the 5th of _August_, and at the same time to several Houses both in
the City and Suburbs, that the People might every where be employ'd in
extinguishing the Fire; that the Conspirators should all fly to the
Palace under pretence of assisting, and that amidst the Horrour and
Confusion which this vast Conflagration would cause, some of them should
assassinate the King; that the Duke _de Camino_ should seize the Queen
and her Children, who might be as serviceable to them in regaining the
Citadel, as the Dutchess of _Mantua_ had been to their Enemies; that at
the same time there should be Fireworks ready to be play'd off, to set
the _Portuguese_ Fleet on fire; that the Archbishop, with the Grand
Inquisitor and all his Officers, should march thro the Town, to keep the
People in awe, and prevent their coming to the Assistance of the King,
so much do they dread the Power of the Inquisition; and that the
Marquiss _de Villareal_ should take the Administration upon him, till
they had receiv'd Orders from the Court of _Spain_.

But as they had not the least reason to hope that the People would
second them, they thought it necessary to make sure of some Troops, and
to that end wrote to _Olivarez_ to send a Fleet towards the Coasts of
_Portugal_, which should be ready to enter the Port of _Lisbon_ at the
time when the Conspiracy should break out; and that there should be some
Forces on foot on the Frontiers of the Kingdom, which should be in a
readiness to act against any Place, which would not willingly surrender
to the King of _Spain_.

But the most difficult part of their Labour was to keep an exact
Correspondence with the _Spanish_ Minister: for since the King had been
inform'd that the Dutchess of _Mantua_ had sent Letters to _Madrid_,
there was such a strict Guard kept upon the Frontiers of the Kingdom,
that no one could go into _Castile_ without the King's own Passport; nor
did they dare attempt to corrupt the Guards, lest they should reveal
what had been offer'd them.

But at last, seeing themselves under an absolute Necessity of
acquainting the _Spanish_ Minister with their Design, without which all
their Measures would infallibly be broken; they cast their Eyes upon a
rich Merchant of _Lisbon_, who was Treasurer of the Custom-House, and
who, by reason of his great Trade, had the King's immediate leave to
send Letters into _Castile_ at any time. This Man's Name was _Baeze_; he
outwardly profess'd the Christian Religion, but was suppos'd to be a
conceal'd Observer of the _Jewish_ Law. To him they offer'd vast Sums of
Money for his Assistance; which, together with the Persuasions of the
_Jews_ who were engag'd in the Conspiracy, prevail'd upon him so far,
that he promis'd to take care that their Letters should be deliver'd to
the Duke _d'Olivarez_.

To this end he enclos'd the Pacquet directed to the Marquiss
_Daiamonti_, Governour of the first Town on the Frontiers of _Spain_,
believing his Letters safe, when once out of the Dominions of
_Portugal_.

The Marquiss, who was nearly related to the Queen, and was at that time
negotiating a Business for the King of _Portugal_, was very much
surpriz'd to see Letters seal'd with the Great Seal of the Inquisition,
and directed to the first Minister of _Spain_; and beginning to fear
that his own Business was discover'd, and notice of it hereby given to
_Olivarez_, he open'd them, and found that they contain'd the Scheme of
a Conspiracy against the Royal Family, and which was speedily to be put
in execution.

Startled at the Contents, he dispatch'd a Courier to the Court of
_Portugal_ with the intercepted Letters. It is impossible to express the
Surprize of the King, when he saw that three Princes, who were so nearly
related to him, with the Archbishop, and several Grandees of the
Kingdom, were contriving how to take away his Life, and give his Crown
to a Stranger.

He immediately communicated their intended Treason to his Privy-Council,
who after a small Deliberation came to a Resolution, which some few days
afterwards was executed. The fifth of _October_ was the Day appointed by
the Conspirators, and the Time Eleven at Night. That very Morning, about
Ten of the Clock, all the Soldiers who were quarter'd in the
neighbouring Villages, march'd into _Lisbon_, it having been given out
that they were then to be review'd in the Court of the Palace. The King
at the same time gave Notes with his own hand to several Officers and
others of his Court, which were seal'd up, with positive Orders not to
open them till Twelve, and then punctually to execute the Contents.

A little before Noon the Archbishop and the Marquiss _de Villareal_ were
sent for to the Palace about some Business, and coming into the King's
Apartment, were arrested without the least noise, or any body's knowing
it; and at the same time one of the Captains of the Guard made the Duke
_de Camino_ a Prisoner. Those who had receiv'd the seal'd Notes having
open'd them, found Orders to arrest such a Man, whom they should convey
to such a Prison, and not lose sight of him till farther Orders. In
short, Matters were manag'd so prudently, that in less than an hour's
time the Forty-seven Conspirators were seiz'd, without so much as giving
any one of them time enough to escape, or even the least suspicion that
their Plot was discover'd.

The News of their intended Barbarity reaching the ears of the People,
they came flocking towards the Palace, and in a tumultuous manner
demanded the Prisoners, that they might tear them piece-meal.

Tho the King was well pleas'd with the Affection and Loyalty of his
Subjects, yet was he a little troubled to see how easily they could be
gather'd together, and what mischief they were at such a time able to
do. Wherefore having thank'd them for the care which they took of him,
and having promis'd that the Traitors should be punish'd according to
Law, he order'd the Magistrates to disperse them.

But as he knew that the most violent Passions of an incens'd People will
soon grow cool, and perhaps dwindle into Compassion, when they no longer
should consider the Criminals as the worst of Villains, who would have
destroy'd their King and Country, but as unhappy Wretches, who must
shortly suffer an ignominious Death; he took care to publish, that the
Conspirators Intent was to assassinate him and all the Royal Family, to
set the whole Town on fire, and those who escaped the raging Flames,
should have fallen by the Sword of the Rebels: That _Spain_ being
resolv'd to have nothing more to fear from the _Portuguese_, would have
sent all their Citizens into _America_, to toil like Slaves, and be
bury'd alive in those Mines, where so many had already perish'd, and to
people the City of _Lisbon_ with a Colony of _Castilians_.

After this the King order'd the Traitors to be brought to their Tryal,
and to this end he appointed Judges, which he took out of the supreme
Court of Judicature, and to whom he added two Grandees of the Kingdom,
upon account of the Archbishop of _Braga_, the Marquiss _de Villareal_,
and the Duke _de Camino_.

The King put their Letters, which they had sent to _Olivarez_, into the
hands of those who were appointed to prosecute them; but with Orders not
to make use of them, if they could by any other means prove them guilty
of High Treason, lest the Court of _Spain_ should thereby discover the
Correspondence which he held with the Marquiss _Daiamonti_: but there
was no necessity of producing them to discover the Truth; for _Baeze_,
who was the first that was brought to the Bar, contradicted himself in
almost every Question which was ask'd him, and being put to the Torture,
his Courage fail'd him, he confess'd his Crime, and discover'd the whole
Plan of the Conspiracy. He own'd that their Design was to kill the King,
that the Office of the Inquisition was now full of Arms, and that they
waited only for _Olivarez_'s Answer to execute their Design.

Most of the other Conspirators were put to the Torture, and their
Deposition entirely agreed with _Baeze_'s. The Archbishop, the Grand
Inquisitor, the Marquiss _de Villareal_, and the Duke _de Camino_, being
unwilling to suffer the Torments of the Question, confess'd their Crime.
These two last were condemn'd to be beheaded, the rest of the
Lay-Traitors to be hang'd, drawn and quarter'd, and the Sentence of the
Ecclesiasticks was refer'd to the King himself. Upon this the King
immediately assembled his Council, and told them, that the consequence
of putting so many Persons of Quality to death, altho they were
criminal, might be fatal: That the chief Conspirators were of the first
Families of the Kingdom, whose Relations would be for ever his conceal'd
Enemies, and that the Desire of revenging their Death would be the
unhappy Source of new Plots: That the Consequence of the Death of Count
_d'Egmont_ in _Flanders_, and of the _Guises_ in _France_, had prov'd
fatal: That if he pardon'd some of them, and chang'd the Sentence of the
others into a Punishment less severe than Death, he should for ever win
theirs, their Friends, and their Kindreds Hearts, and bind them to his
Service by the Ties of Gratitude: but yet, That notwithstanding he
himself was inclin'd to Mercy, he had assembled his Council to know
their Opinions, and to follow that which should seem the most
reasonable, and the most just.

The Marquiss _de Ferreira_ was the first who spoke, and was for having
them executed without delay: he represented, That in such cases as these
Justice only ought to be consulted, and that Mercy was most dangerous:
That Pardon would seem not so much the Effect of the Goodness, as
Weakness of the Prince, or the Fear of their threatning powerful
Friends: That if these should go unpunish'd, it would bring the
Government into Contempt, and encourage their Relations to deliver them
out of Prison, or perhaps to carry Matters farther: That now, at his
Accession to the Crown, he ought, by an Example of Severity, to deter
others from ever attempting the like. He urg'd farther, That they were
Traitors not only to the King, but also to the State, whose present
Constitution they had endeavour'd to subvert: That he ought rather to
hearken to the Justice which he ow'd his People, and punish these
Criminals, than to his own Inclination of forgiving them, especially at
a time when his Preservation and the publick Safety were inseparable.

The whole Council being of the same opinion, the King yielded, and the
next day Sentence was executed. The Archbishop of of _Lisbon_ being
willing to save one of his Friends, came to the Queen, and sollicited
her for a Pardon, with all the Assurance of a Man, who thought that
nothing could be deny'd him, and that his former Services might claim a
much greater Favour. But the Queen, who was convinc'd of the Justice and
absolute Necessity of their suffering the Law, and how much a
Distinction of this nature would incense the Friends and Relations of
the rest, answer'd the Archbishop in few words, but with such a Tone, as
made him see it would be in vain to urge his Request any farther; "My
Lord, the only Favour I can now grant you, is to forget that you ever
ask'd me this."

The King, unwilling to disoblige the Clergy, and especially the Court of
_Rome_, who had not as yet acknowledg'd him King, or receiv'd his
Ambassadors, would not suffer the Archbishop of _Braga_, or the Grand
Inquisitor, to be executed, but condemn'd them to a perpetual
Imprisonment; where the Archbishop shortly after died of a violent
Fever, a Disease often fatal to State-Prisoners, who for some politick
Reason must not be led to open Execution.

Nothing could be equal to the Surprize of _Olivarez_, when this News was
brought him; he could not imagine by what means the King of _Portugal_
had discover'd their Design, nor would it ever have been known, had not
an Accident happen'd, which made him see that it was the Marquiss
_Daiamonti_, who had unravel'd the dark Design, and acquainted the King
with it.

This Prince still kept a very good Correspondence with the Enemies of
_Spain_, his Ports were open to the Fleets of _France_ and _Holland_; he
had a Resident at _Barcelona_, and encourag'd the revolting
_Catalonians_: in short, he did all he could to weaken _Spain_, not only
by increasing the Rage of its Foes, but also by endeavouring to raise up
new ones. To this end, he had already inclin'd the Duke _de Medina
Sidonia_, his Brother-in-law, to rebel; whom the Marquiss _Daiamonti_, a
_Castilian_, and their mutual Confidant, at length entirely seduced.
This Nobleman was, as has been before observ'd, nearly related to the
Queen of _Portugal_, and the Duke of _Medina_: He was Governour of a
Place at the Mouth of the _Guadiano_, and just on the Frontiers of
_Portugal_, which made it easy for him to keep a good Correspondence
with that Court; nor did he question, but that by being serviceable to
two such powerful Families, he should easily make his own Fortune. He
was valiant, enterprizing, hated the first Minister, and at the same
time did not in the least value his Life; a Quality so very necessary
to those who embark themselves in any dangerous Design.

He wrote privately to the Duke, to congratulate him upon the Discovery
of the Archbishop's Plot, and the Preservation of the Life of the Queen
his Sister, and all the Royal Family; he at the same time observ'd how
grateful it must be to him to see the Crown of _Portugal_ one day adorn
the Head of his Nephews, which made that Kingdom a sure Refuge for him
in time of Distress: which perhaps might be too near at hand, since he
could never reckon himself safe while _Olivarez_ was at the head of
Affairs, whose only aim was to ruin all the Grandees; nor was it to be
suppos'd that the crafty Statesman would long leave him Governour of so
large a Province, and in the Neighbourhood of _Portugal_: That he would
advise him seriously to reflect on all these things, and let him know
his Resolutions; to which end he should send him a Person in whom he
could confide, and to whom they both might safely trust their Secret.

The Duke was naturally proud and ambitious, and with Envy had beheld his
Brother-in-law raising himself to the Throne; nor would he, on his side,
willingly neglect any Opportunity of doing the like. Believing by what
the Marquiss said, that he had some very advantageous Proposal of this
kind to make him, he sent _Lewis de Castile_, his Confidant, to
_Daiamonti_, who seeing his Credentials, at once open'd his Mind, and
bid him remember with what ease the Duke of _Braganza_ had made himself
Master of the Crown of Portugal; nor could there ever be a more
favourable time for the Duke of _Medina Sidonia_ to do the like, and
make himself independent of the Crown of _Spain_.

After this he represented the Weakness of that Kingdom, which was
exhausted by the Wars which the _French_ and _Dutch_ had continually
waged against them: That _Catalonia_ now employ'd all its Forces, nor
would the King know how to help himself, should _Andalusia_ rise in Arms
against him, and the War be thus carry'd into the very Heart of the
Kingdom: That the People would certainly side with him, being always
fond of a new Government; besides which, they had reason enough to
complain of the old one, which had so oppress'd them with Taxes, and
extorted such vast Sums from them: That the Duke of _Medina_ was as well
beloved by the _Andalusians_, as the Duke of _Braganza_ was at the time
of the Revolution by the _Portuguese_: That the only thing which now
remain'd to be done, was to gain all those, who, under him, were
Governours of Towns and Forts, without entrusting them with the Secret,
which might be done; and to fill all Places of Trust with his surest
Friends: That as soon as the Galloons, which were expected from the
_Indies_, arriv'd, he should seize them, and the Riches which were on
board would defray the Expences of this Enterprize: That the King of
_Portugal_, with his Allies, should have a Fleet ready to enter _Cadiz_,
and there land a sufficient Number of Forces, to subdue those who would
unseasonably shew their Loyalty to _Spain_.

_Lewis de Castile_ being return'd to his Master, gave him a faithful
Account of all that had pass'd between him and the Marquiss. The Duke,
dazled with the Prospect of a Crown, resolv'd to hazard every thing,
rather than fail of obtaining one. He was chief Commander there both by
Sea and Land, as Captain-General of the Ocean, and Governour of the
Province, in which he also had a very large Estate, and several Towns
under his own immediate Jurisdiction. This seem'd very much to
facilitate his Design, and made him believe, that it was in his power to
put a Crown upon his Head whenever he pleas'd.

Upon this he sent _Lewis de Castile_ back to the Marquiss, that they
might together agree upon the properest Measures of accomplishing their
Project, and especially of engaging the Crown of _Portugal_ to lend them
all the Assistance it possibly could. Mean while, he himself was
disposing every thing for the intended Revolution; he put his own
Creatures in all those Places where their Assistance would be most
serviceable to him; he frequently would pity the Soldiers, who were not
paid as they ought to be, and the People, who were over-burden'd with
excessive Taxes.

The Marquiss _Daiamonti_ was well pleas'd to see the Duke in that
Disposition he had long wish'd to see him in; he wanted to acquaint the
King of _Portugal_ with it, but was unwilling to trust to Letters, and
fear'd he could not send a Messenger so privately, but that the Court of
_Spain_ might discover it, and have just cause to mistrust his Fidelity:
However, at last he cast his eyes upon a crafty and intriguing Monk, who
for love of Money, or hope of Preferment, would undertake any thing; he
was call'd Father _Nicholas de Valasco_, of the Order of _St. Francis_.
No one could be fitter for his purpose, since in the Countries where the
Inquisition is, this Habit is so much respected, that no one would dare
to pry into his Actions, and observe his Steps.

As soon as he had receiv'd his Instructions, he came to _Castro-Marino_,
the first Town on the Frontiers of _Portugal_, pretending to ransom some
_Castilian_ Prisoners which were detain'd in _Portugal_. The King, who
had notice given him of it, by a Letter from the Marquiss _Daiamonti_,
was desir'd to seize him, and bring him to Court: This was accordingly
done; he was arrested as a Spy, loaded with Chains, and brought to
_Lisbon_ as a State-Criminal, whom the Ministry themselves would
examine; where he was immediately cast into Prison, and seemingly
watch'd very strictly: some time after he was set at liberty, since upon
Examination it appear'd, that his only Intent was to ransom some
_Castilian_ Prisoners; and partly, to make him amends for his former ill
Usage, he was permitted to come to Court, to treat with the proper
Officer about it.

The King saw him himself several times, and promis'd him, that as a
Reward of his Industry and faithful Service, he would give him a
Bishoprick. The Monk, flatter'd with the hopes of the Mitre, would never
stir from the Palace; he made his court to the Queen, and was always
waiting upon the Ministers: He wanted to be let into all the
State-Intrigues, and did all he could to shew what Credit he had at
Court; and thus, without directly revealing his Secret, he betray'd it
by his Pride and Inconsiderateness. It plainly appear'd, that the
Severity of his Prison was only a blind, and the Examination of the
Ministry a pretence to introduce him into Court. Many and various were
the Conjectures which were made about his real Business there; but at
last a _Castilian_, who was Prisoner at _Lisbon_, discover'd the whole
Intrigue.

This _Castilian_, nam'd _Sancho_, was a Creature of the Duke of _Medina
Sidonia_'s, and, before the late Revolution, Pay-Master of the _Spanish_
Army in _Portugal_. He, with the rest of his Countrymen who were taken
up at that time, groan'd in Confinement, nor had they any prospect of
Liberty; but hearing of this Monk, and being inform'd of his Country,
his extravagant Conduct, his Credit at Court, and several other
Circumstances, which made it plain that he was there employ'd in some
secret Business; he thought he had now an opportunity of obtaining his
Liberty, and with this hope he wrote the Monk a long Letter, full of
Expressions fit to sooth his Vanity; in it he complain'd, that the King
of _Portugal_ detain'd him in Prison, (with the other _Castilians_) who
was a Servant and Creature of the Duke his Brother-in-law: and to
confirm it, he sent him several Letters, wrote to him by that Prince
himself some little time before the Revolution, in which he treated him
as one in whom he repos'd an entire Confidence.

The _Franciscan_ answer'd _Sancho_'s Letter, and assur'd him, that
nothing could recommend him more to him, than his belonging to the Duke
of _Medina_; that he would use all his endeavour to procure him his
Liberty, but in the mean time he must take care not so much as to open
his mouth about it. The _Spaniard_ waited some days for the Effect of
his Promise, and at last sent him a second Epistle, in which he
represented, that seven Months were expir'd since he was cast into
Prison; that the _Spanish_ Minister seem'd to have quite forgotten him,
since he neither talk'd of ransoming or exchanging him; and that
therefore he had no hopes of Liberty left, but what were built upon the
Charity and Interest of the Reverend Father.

The Monk, who thought he should very much oblige the Duke of _Medina_,
by procuring _Sancho_ his Freedom, begg'd it of the King, and obtain'd
it. He went to the Prison himself, to fetch him out of it, and offer'd
to have him included in a Passport, which was to be given to some of the
Dutchess of _Mantua_'s Servants, who were then returning to _Madrid_.
But the crafty _Castilian_ answer'd him, that _Madrid_ was a Place to
which he could never more return; that he must not pretend to appear at
Court, unless he desir'd to be thrown into Prison again, seeing that
_Olivarez_ was so severe and unjust, that he would expect his Accounts
to be made up, altho in the late Revolution he had been stript not only
of his Money, but had had his Books also taken from him: To this he
added, that he desir'd nothing more than to be near the Duke of
_Medina_, his Patron, who was both able and willing, he did not
question, to advance him.

The _Franciscan_ wanting somebody whom he could trust his Secret to, and
by whom he might give the Marquiss _Daiamonti_ a strict Account of his
Negotiation, cast his eyes upon the _Castilian_, who seem'd very much
attach'd to the Interest of the Duke of _Medina_. To this end he
detain'd the _Spaniard_ some time, pretending that he could not as yet
procure him a Passport, tho his Intent was to observe him, and see
whether or not he was a Person fit to be entrusted. Their being
frequently together begat an intimate Acquaintance, which they both
mutually desir'd; the Monk, that he might engage the _Spaniard_ to serve
him; and the _Spaniard_, that he might make himself Master of the Monk's
Secret.

This holy Man, like the rest of his Brethren, puff'd up with Vanity,
could not forbear one day telling his Friend, that he would not long see
him in that Garb in which he was, that he had a Bishoprick promis'd
him, and that he did not despair of obtaining the _Roman_ Purple.
_Sancho_, to make him prattle the faster, pretended that he did not
believe a word of what he said. The Fryar laugh'd at his Incredulity:
"And I suppose, _continued he_, you would not believe me neither, if I
should tell you, that the Duke of _Medina_ will shortly be a King." The
other, to get the Secret quite out of him, urg'd the Impossibility of
it; upon which the Monk told him the whole Story: That _Andalusia_ must
in a little time acknowledge the Duke for their Sovereign: That the
Marquiss _Daiamonti_, who had also discover'd the _Spanish_ Plot to the
King of _Portugal_, was the chief Negotiator and Instrument of this
intended Revolution: That he should shortly see strange Alterations in
_Spain_, and that he had now an opportunity of making his Fortune only
by being secret, and taking care to deliver some Letters from him to the
Duke and Marquiss.

_Sancho_, well pleas'd at the Discovery of this Secret, which he had
long labour'd to get out of him, renew'd his Protestations of Fidelity
and Secrecy, and his Offers of Service; and having taken _Velasco_'s
Letters, told him, that he should be proud of the Opportunity of serving
the Prince, and hoped that he should be thought worthy of the Honour of
bringing him an Answer. Upon this the _Castilian_ set out for
_Andalusia_, but was no sooner got into the _Spanish_ Territories, than
he took the _Madrid_ Road; and as soon as he arriv'd, went strait to
the Minister's House, and sent him word that _Sancho_, Pay-Master of the
Army in _Portugal_, was just escaped out of Prison, where he had been
confin'd by the Usurper, and had some important Business to communicate
to him.

It was a very hard matter to gain Access to _Olivarez_, who had his set
Hours of granting Audience, and at which time he sent word the
Pay-Master must return. Enrag'd at this Refusal, _Sancho_ cry'd he must,
he would speak to him; that his Business was no Trifle, but the Safety
of the Kingdom depended on its being immediately reveal'd.

This being told _Olivarez_, he order'd him to be admitted: _Sancho_
enter'd the Room, and threw himself at his feet, crying the Kingdom was
sav'd from the Ruin which threaten'd it, since he had gain'd Admittance
to one, in whose power it was to prevent it; then told the whole Story
of the Duke of _Medina_'s Intent, encourag'd in it by the King of
_Portugal_, and persuaded to it by the Marquiss _Daiamonti_, his Design
of seizing upon the Galloons, and of making the Soldiers of _Andalusia_
turn their Arms against their King: to justify all which, he deliver'd
those Letters given him by the _Franciscan_ for the Duke and Marquiss,
and which contain'd the Scheme of the Conspiracy.

_Olivarez_, was so surpriz'd at the Strangeness of this News, that he
could not for some time utter a word, but at last recovering himself, he
prais'd _Sancho_ for his Loyalty, and told him that he deserv'd a
double Reward, not only as he had reveal'd the Plot, but also as he had
not been afraid to discover it even to the nearest Relation of the chief
Conspirator. Then order'd he the _Spaniard_ to be conducted into a
private Apartment, and be debarr'd the liberty of speaking to any one.

Mean while the Minister went into the King's Apartment, and told him all
that _Sancho_ had related, and shew'd him the Letters which he had
deliver'd him.

Never was Prince in a greater Consternation than _Philip_ was, long had
he observ'd and dreaded the haughty Carriage of the _Gusmans_; and as
the Loss of _Portugal_, which he thought was owing to the Dutchess of
_Braganza_, was still fresh in his Memory, he could not forbear telling
_Olivarez_, in a reproachful manner, that all the Misfortunes which the
_Spaniards_ had lately suffer'd, they were beholden to his Family for.
This Prince wanted neither Wit or Judgment, but he was so addicted to
Pleasure, that he would never apply himself to any thing that carry'd
the face of Business, but would rather have lost half his Dominions,
than be oblig'd to quit his indolent and effeminate manner of Living:
Wherefore having vented his Passion in this Reproach, he gave the
_Franciscan_'s Letters back to _Olivarez_, without so much as opening
them; ordering him to have them examin'd by a Committee, compos'd of
three Members of his Privy-Council, who should make their Report to
him.

This was all that _Olivarez_ desir'd, for now he could give the Business
what Turn he pleas'd. He chose three of his own Creatures for the
Commissioners, into whose hands the Letters were put, and by whom
_Sancho_ was examin'd several times; all their Aim was to acquit the
Duke of _Medina_, to which end _Olivarez_, himself came to _Sancho_, and
affecting an affable Behaviour, and an extraordinary Kindness for the
Man; "How, my dear _Sancho, said_ he, shall we contrive to acquit the
Duke of _Medina_ of a Crime, which is testify'd only by the Letters of
an unknown Monk, and who probably was bribed by the Duke's Enemies to
lay this to his charge; for certain it is, that never Governour of
_Andalusia_ discharg'd his Duty better, both towards the King and his
Province."

_Sancho_, who was fully persuaded of the Truth of his Deposition, and
fear'd that any of the Criminals should be acquitted, lest he should
lose his hoped-for Reward, still maintain'd, that he was well assur'd
that there was an horrid Conspiracy form'd against the Government in
favour of the Duke, who was also at the head of it; that the Marquiss
_Daiamonti_ was the Contriver of the Plot; and that he himself had read
several of their Letters, which were shewn him by the _Franciscan_, and
was certain, that if _Olivarez_ did not prevent it in time, all
_Andalusia_ would be up in Arms, to make their Governour their Monarch.

_Olivarez_, very unwilling that this Business should be too narrowly
search'd into, took an opportunity of telling the King, that the Monk's
Letters had been decypher'd and examin'd, and that he really believ'd
him to be some Wretch who had been bribed to calumniate the Duke; for
there was no Letter of his produc'd, nor did _Sancho_ make any formal
Deposition against him. However, as it was impossible to be too cautious
in such a case as this, his Opinion was, that the Duke must be artfully
drawn to Court, for if he had any such Design on foot, it was not safe
to arrest him in _Andalusia_; that some Forces must be sent to _Cadiz_,
under a new Governour; that the Marquiss _Daiamonti_ must be taken up at
the same time, and if they were found guilty, his Majesty might deliver
them over to the Severity of the Law.

This haughty Minister's Will was not only generally a Law to the
Subjects of _Spain_, but was always one to the King; who told him, that
he should manage this Business as he thought fit, for he left it
entirely to him. Upon this _Olivarez_ sent his Nephew, Don _Lewis
d'Haro_, to the Duke of _Medina_, to tell him what had been depos'd
against him, and with Orders, that guilty or not guilty, he should
immediately come to Court, which if he did, his Pardon should be
granted; but that if he defer'd his Journey, it would no longer be in
his power to procure it.

This Message thunder-struck the Duke of _Medina_, and he saw himself
under a necessity of obeying, or immediately flying into _Portugal_: but
then considering how ignominious it was to spend his days in Indolence,
and live a banish'd Man, especially in a Country where there was no
Employment worthy of him, and at the same time knowing how great
_Olivarez_'s Power was; he resolv'd to trust him: and set out for
_Madrid_, and with such diligence did he pursue his Journey, that the
King was immediately inclin'd to believe him innocent, or to forgive
him, should he be found guilty.

Whilst Don _Lewis d'Haro_ was employ'd in this Business, a Messenger was
sent to take up the Marquiss _Daiamonti_; and the Duke of _Ciudad-real_
march'd into _Cadiz_ at the head of 5000 Men.

As soon as the Duke of _Medina_ arriv'd at _Madrid_, he went and
alighted at _Olivarez_'s House, to whom he confess'd the Conspiracy,
shew'd him the Scheme by which they were to proceed, but cast all the
Odium of it upon the Marquiss. _Olivarez_ that instant introduc'd him
into the King's Closet, where he threw himself at his Majesty's feet,
and with Tears confess'd his Crime, and begg'd his pardon. _Philip_, who
was of a soft and compassionate nature, mix'd his Tears with the Duke's,
and easily forgave him. But as it would have been very imprudent to have
expos'd him to the same Temptation a second time, he was order'd to stay
at Court; part of his Estate was also confiscated, the King being
sensible, that had he not been too rich, and too powerful, he would
never have made an Attempt of this kind: and a Governour and a Garison
were plac'd in _Saint Lucar de Barameda_, the Town in which the Dukes of
_Medina Sidonia_ generally resided.

_Olivarez_, to persuade the King that his Relation's Repentance was
sincere, advis'd him to send a formal Challenge to the Duke of
_Braganza_; which he refus'd at first, objecting that both Divine and
Human Laws forbad Duels. But _Olivarez_ persisting in his Resolution of
having one sent, _Medina_ reply'd, that he could not in Conscience come
to this Extremity with his Brother-in-law, unless the King would obtain
a Bull from the Pope, which should secure him from the Censure of the
Church, which always excommunicated Duelists.

_Olivarez_ answer'd him, that this was not a time for Scruples of
Conscience, but that he must now think of satisfying both the King and
People of the Sincerity of his Repentance; that in short it was no
matter whether he would fight or not, provided he would not disown a
Challenge, which he would publish in his Name. The Duke, who now plainly
saw that _Olivarez_'s Intent was only to amuse the People, consented to
it, and the Minister drew up one himself. Several of them were sent into
_Portugal_, as well as into most Courts of _Europe_. A Copy of it may
probably not be displeasing to the Reader, who will be surpriz'd to see
a Challenge, which by its Length, Formality, and Stile, would better
have became a Knight-Errant of old, than such a Prince as the Duke of
_Medina Sidonia_ was.

[Illustration]




     Don _GASPAR ALONCO Perez de Gusman_, Duke of _Medina Sidonia_,
     Marquiss, Earl, and Baron of _Saint Lucar de Barameda_, Captain
     General of the Ocean, of the Coasts of _Andalusia_, and of the
     Armies of _Portugal_, Gentleman of the Bed-Chamber to his Catholick
     Majesty;

     Whom God Preserve.


_Whereas nothing has been more conspicuous to the whole World, than the
treasonable Practices of ~John~ late Duke of ~Braganza~; Be also_
_his damnable Intentions known, of seducing and tainting with Disloyalty
the faithful Family of the ~Gusmans~, which ever has been, and for the
future ever shall be most true and loyal to the King their Master, in
whose Service so many of them have shed their Blood. This Usurper has
endeavour'd to insinuate into the Minds of Foreign Princes, as well as
of his own Rebel ~Portuguese~, that I would aid and assist him, and
enter into his Measures; hoping thereby to keep up the Spirits of those
who have join'd with him, and to put me out of favour with the King my
Master, (whom God preserve) thinking that by these means he should
alienate my Duty and Affection from my Master, and then I should consent
to his cursed Designs, without that Repugnance_ _which he has found in
me. And the better to accomplish his Design, he has made use of a Monk,
who was sent by the Town of ~Daiamonti~ to ~Castro-Marino~ in
~Portugal~, to treat about the Ransom of a prisoner: which Monk being
carried to ~Lisbon~, was suborn'd, and persuaded to give out that I
was engag'd in the Conspiracy, and that I would permit any Foreign Army
to land in ~Andalusia~, to favour their Designs: and to give the
better colour to his Story, he shew'd some forg'd Letters, and which he
pretended to have receiv'd from me._

_All this was done with a Design to persuade several Princes to send him
some Forces, and would to God they had, that I might have shewn my
Loyalty, by destroying them and their_ _Ships; which will easily appear
to have been my Intent, by the Orders which I left on all the Coasts._

_These things have been a sore Affliction to me; but what grieves me
still more, is, that his Wife should be my Sister, whose Blood I would
gladly shed, since by Rebellion tainted and corrupted, that I might give
an evident Proof of my Loyalty to my King, and efface all those
Suspicions, which these Rumours may have imprinted in the Minds of the
People._

[Sidenote: 1641.]

_For these Reasons therefore I challenge the said ~John~ late Duke of
~Braganza~, as being a Traitor both to God and his King, and invite
him to meet me in Person, and in single Combat try our Fortune, with or
without Seconds, and arm'd in_ _what manner he please; the Place shall
be near ~Valentia d'Alcantra~, which is on the Frontiers both of
~Castile~ and ~Portugal~, and where I will wait for him four-score
Days, from the first of ~October~ to the nineteenth of ~December~ of
this present Year. The twenty last Days I will wait for him in Person,
and on the time which he shall appoint I will enter the Lists; which
time, though it be long, I give him, not only that he the said Tyrant,
but also that all ~Europe~, nay, that the whole World may know it. To
this end, I will send Ten Chevaliers a League within ~Portugal~; as
also, he shall send Ten a League within ~Castile~, as Hostages, and on
that day I will shew him the Heinousness and Baseness of his Crime._

_But if he the said ~John~ late Duke of ~Braganza~, should fail
meeting me, to give me Gentleman-like Satisfaction, and thereby deprive
me of the Opportunity of shewing my Loyalty to the King my Master, and
the natural Hatred which our Family has to Traitors; I offer (with
Submission to his Catholick Majesty, whom God preserve) my good Town of
~St. Lucar de Barameda~, which always has been the Seat of the Dukes
of ~Medina Sidonia~, to any Man who shall kill him. To which end, I
beg of his Catholick Majesty, that I may not have any longer the Command
of the Army which is to march against him, being so transported with
Rage, that I should not be Master of that Sedateness and Conduct, which
are so necessary to_ _a General; but that his Majesty would give me
leave to be only at the head of a Thousand of my own People, on whose
Courage, as well as my own, I may rely, that in case the said Usurper
should not accept my Challenge, we may bring him dead or alive to his
said Majesty. And that I may not be thought to be wanting in my Duty to
my King, I offer one of my best Towns to the first Governour, or other
Officer, belonging to the Usurper, who will surrender any Place to the
King my Master; never thinking that I can do enough for his Service,
since to him, and to his glorious Ancestors, I owe all that I enjoy._

     Given at _Toledo_ the 29th of _September_, 1641.





[Illustration]


According to his Promise, the Duke of _Medina_ appear'd in the Lists,
follow'd by Don _John de Garray_, Lieutenant-General of the _Spanish_
Cavalry; there the Duke of _Braganza_ was summon'd in a formal manner:
But that Prince was too prudent to play a part in this Farce; or had the
thing been of a more serious nature, a Sovereign Prince was not to
venture his Life against a Subject of his Enemy.

Whilst _Olivarez_ amus'd the People in this manner, he was also taking
care to turn the Resentment of the King and People upon the Marquiss
_Daiamonti_, whom he intended to prove the only guilty Person: to this
end he flatter'd him with the Hopes of a Pardon, and that, as well as
the Duke of _Medina_, he should taste the Bounties of a merciful Prince,
provided he would be open in his Confession; but that Kings, like God,
whose Images they were, never forgave any, but those who heartily and
sincerely repented them of their Crimes.

The Marquiss trusting to this Promise, which the Duke of _Medina_'s
Example gave him no room to doubt of, sign'd a Paper which _d'Olivarez_
brought him, and which he immediately put into the hands of those who
were to try him. Upon this Confession of his he was indicted, and
condemn'd to be beheaded. When the Judge pass'd Sentence, he heard it
without the least Concern, or so much as murmuring at _Olivarez_ or the
Duke. That same Night he supp'd as heartily as usual, and when they came
to lead him to Execution the next Morning, he was still asleep. He
ascended the Block without speaking one word, whilst a Contempt of Death
might be read in his Looks, and died with a Courage and Resolution
worthy of a better Cause. Such was the end of a Conspiracy, from which
the King of _Spain_ escaped meerly by Accident, or rather by a Decree of
Providence, which cannot connive at Crimes of this nature, and will
seldom suffer Treachery to prevail.

The King of _Portugal_ seeing this Project miscarry, resolv'd to
maintain himself on the Throne no longer by such clandestine Means, but
by open Force, and the Assistance of his Allies. _France_ seem'd
particularly to take the House of _Braganza_ under its Protection, as
being the most antient Branch of their own Royal Family.

The foreign War so employ'd the _Spanish_ Forces, that the _Portuguese_
had always the advantage over them, and they drove them still farther
from their Frontiers. The King might easily at that time have enter'd
into the very Center of _Castile_, had he had a good General, and
disciplin'd Soldiers; but his Army was chiefly compos'd of Militia,
fitter to make sudden Incursions into the Enemy's Country, than to bear
the Fatigue of a regular Campaign. Another thing that hinder'd his
making a greater Progress with his Army, was, that he had not Money
enough to pay them, and consequently not Forces enough on foot; for as
at his coming to the Crown, he had taken off all Taxes from the People,
that they might the better relish his Government, and had only his own
Estate to defray the Expences of the War; nor would he ever venture to
lay new Taxes upon them. But this Want of his was partly recompens'd by
the Necessity of _Spain_, who at that time had no better Generals than
the _Portuguese_, and whose Treasures, towards the latter end of
_Philip_ the Fourth's Reign, were exhausted.

On the sixth of _November_, 1656. died this Prince: in all the Encomiums
and Panegyricks made upon him by the _Portuguese_, he is celebrated for
his Piety and Moderation. Foreign Historians upbraid him with Cowardice,
and report, that he always distrusted both himself and others; that it
was a difficult point, especially for the Grandees, to get Access to
him; and that he was free with no one but his ancient domestick
Servants, especially with one that was always in company with his
Confessor. In short, from what we can gather of his Life, he was a
peaceable and religious Prince, and endow'd with Qualities which would
better have became a private Gentleman than a Monarch; so that we can
attribute his being rais'd to the Throne only to the inveterate Hate
which the _Portuguese_ bore the _Castilians_, and to the Ambition,
Courage, and Counsels of his Queen, whom by his last Will he nam'd
Regent of the Kingdom during his Son's Minority; not doubting but that
one who could raise herself to a Throne, would not want Courage to
preserve it for her Children. He left behind him two Sons and a
Daughter; the elder of the Sons was Don _Alphonso_, of a peevish and
melancholy Temper, who had quite lost the Use of one Side, and was at
the time of his Father's Death near thirteen Years old: Don _Pedro_, the
younger, was but eight: Donna _Catharina_ their Sister, was older than
either of them, and was born before the Revolution.

Don _Alphonso_ was immediately shewn to the People, and proclaim'd King,
and the Queen took the Regency upon her. This Princess would willingly
have signaliz'd herself by some glorious Action, but the Commanders of
the _Portuguese_ Army were fitter for Soldiers than Generals, and there
was not an Officer amongst them, who was Engineer enough to know how to
fortify a Place, or besiege a Town. Nor was there a Man in the
Privy-Council, who could be look'd upon as a Statesman; most of them
could indeed make fine Speeches and elaborate Discourses upon the
Necessities of the State, and the Misfortunes in which it would probably
fall, but never a one of them knew how to prevent or remedy them.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: 1657.]

To these Evils we must attribute the ill Success of her Arms before
_Olivenza_ and _Badajos_, where the _Spaniards_ obliged them to raise
the Siege. Besides this, they had fallen out with the _Dutch_ about the
Trade to the _Indies_; and the _French_, after the _Pyrenean_ Treaty,
seem'd to have forgotten them.

The Queen finding herself without any regular Troops, without able
Officers or good Counsellors, and without foreign Alliances, was obliged
by her Courage, Capacity, and Application, to supply the want of all
these; she herself discharg'd the Duty of a Secretary of State, and took
care to keep a good Correspondence with all the Courts of _Europe_,
which might be serviceable to her: In short, had she never encounter'd
all these Difficulties, she could not have reveal'd all those _hidden
Vertues, which shun the Day, and lie conceal'd in the smooth Seasons,
and the Calms of Life_.

By such Care and Diligence for a long time she sav'd _Portugal_ from
that Ruin which threaten'd it; but _Spain_ now pouring all its Forces in
upon her, she found herself unable to resist them, unless she could
procure better Officers. To this end she cast her Eyes upon _Frederick_
Count of _Schomberg_, whose Name and Valour were already sufficiently
known. She would willingly have given him the chief Command of the Army,
but was afraid at this juncture of disobliging her Generalissimo;
wherefore she order'd the Count _de Soure_, her Ambassador in _France_,
to treat with the Count _de Schomberg_ about his coming into _Portugal_,
where he should have only the Title of Lieutenant-General; but in case
of the Death or Resignation of the present Commander, he should be made
Generalissimo of all her Forces.

The Count set out for _Lisbon_ with four-score Officers, and above four
hundred Horsemen, all Veterans, who perfectly understood the Discipline
of an Army, and would upon occasion make good Leaders.

Before the Count went into _Portugal_, he made a Voyage into _England_,
where he saw King _Charles_ the Second, who was lately restor'd: He had
private Orders from the Regent, to endeavour to discover whether King
_Charles_ might be brought to marry the Infanta of _Portugal_. The Count
negotiated this Business with so much Address, that he made both the
King and Chancellor _Hyde_ desirous of this Alliance. The Queen,
extremely satisfy'd with what he had done, desir'd him to hasten into
_Portugal_, and sent the Marquiss _de Sande_ to conclude the Business.

[Sidenote: _May 31. 1662._]

But the King of _Spain_, foreseeing what might be the consequence of
this Match, did all he could to prevent it; he offer'd to give any
Protestant Princess Three Millions for her Portion, provided the King
would marry her; and by his Ambassador propos'd the Princesses of
_Denmark_, _Saxony_, or _Orange_. But the Chancellor represented to the
King how nearly it concern'd him to maintain the House of _Braganza_ on
the Throne, and not let _Philip_ become Master of all _Spain_ and the
_Indies_. His Speech produc'd the desir'd Effect, and King _Charles_
married the Infanta. Thus did a Protestant Statesman persuade his
Sovereign to marry a Catholick Princess, whilst a Prince of the _Roman_
Communion, who valued himself in a particular manner upon the Title of
the most Catholick King, offer'd him vast Sums of Money, to engage him
to wed a Protestant.

Shortly after King _Charles_, by his Mediation, establish'd a Treaty of
Commerce between the States of _Holland_ and the Crown of _Portugal_;
after which he sent a considerable Number of Troops into that Kingdom,
commanded by the Earl of _Inchequin_: but having recall'd him, he
order'd that the Forces should stay under the Command of _Schomberg_; so
that the Count shortly saw himself at the head of the chosen Forces of
three Kingdoms. Not but that there was a _Portuguese_ Generalissimo, or
at least one who had the Title, but the Count had all the Authority,
which he made use of to establish an exact and regular Discipline
amongst the _Portuguese_: He taught them the Order of marching,
encamping, besieging, and regularly fortifying a Town; so that all those
Places on the Frontiers of the Kingdom, which were before naked and
defenceless, soon became capable of making a vigorous Defence.

The Regent Queen, proud of having met with such a General, carry'd the
War vigorously on, and her Arms were almost every where crown'd with
Success; never were the _Portuguese_ Forces better disciplin'd, the
People bless'd her Government, the Grandees continu'd in perfect
Submission to it through Fear and Respect: but though Fortune favour'd
her abroad, she met with domestick Cares and Troubles, which chang'd the
face of every thing.

Whilst the Regent was taking care to place the Crown with Surety on her
Son's Head, he, on the other hand, endeavour'd to make himself unworthy
of it, by his irregular Manner of Living; he was mean-spirited,
melancholy, and cruel, could not bear the Authority of his Mother, and
despis'd the Advices of his Governours and Ministers; he always refus'd
the Company of the Lords of his Houshold, and would divert himself with
none but Negroes, Mulattoes, and all the Scum of the _Lisbonite_ Youth:
and spite of the Care of his Governours, he had got a little Court
compos'd of such like People, whom he call'd his Bravoes, with whom he
us'd to scour the Streets at Night, and insult all those who
unfortunately fell into his way.

This Disorder of Mind had been first caus'd by a Palsy, which had
afflicted him when about four Years of Age, and which had made fatal
Impressions not only on his Limbs, but also on his Brain. Whilst he was
young, his Faults had been wink'd at by his Tutors, who thought that so
infirm a Child could never bear the Fatigues of a severe Education, and
hoped that Time would both strengthen his Body, and sweeten his Temper:
but this Indulgence ruin'd him. 'Tis true, that by the assistance of
Remedies, and help of Time, his Constitution grew stronger, he could
fence, ride, and bear any Fatigue; but his Temper never became better.
His Passions encreasing with his Age, they soon prevail'd over his
Reason, which was but weak, and he gave a loose to Licentiousness and
Debauchery. He would bring common Prostitutes into the Palace, fetch
them himself from the Stews, and very often spend whole Nights amongst
them there.

The Queen, overwhelm'd with Grief, and fearing that the Irregularity of
her Son would at once destroy the Labours of her whole Life, resolv'd
several times within herself to have him confin'd, and make his Brother
reign in his stead; but dreading to excite a Civil War, which would have
favour'd the _Spanish_ Arms, she dropp'd the bold Design: sometimes she
hoped the King might yet be reclaim'd, especially if he was depriv'd of
the Company of _Conti_, a Merchant's Son, his first Favourite, and
Companion of all his Debaucheries. To this end she had _Conti_ privately
seiz'd, and carry'd on board a Ship which was bound for _Brazil_, with
Orders that he should never return to _Portugal_ on pain of Death.

The King at first seem'd very much griev'd at the Loss of his Favourite,
but comforting himself by little and little, he was at last pacify'd,
and seem'd very much alter'd for the better, would hearken to Advice,
and paid the Queen an unusual Respect, who was congratulated by the
Ministry and the whole Court, upon the extraordinary Success of her
Enterprize.

But this apparent Tranquillity and Alteration of the King's, was only a
Veil to cover a deep Design, and of which his Mother never thought him
capable; so that this Princess, who could read in the very Hearts of the
most dissembling Courtiers, was overreach'd by a half-witted Youth.

The King had complain'd of _Conti_'s Banishment to the Count _de
Castel-Melhor_, a _Portuguese_ Nobleman, of an illustrious Birth, subtle
and insinuating, but fitter to manage a Court-Intrigue, than a Business
of Importance. The Count thought that a fair Opportunity offer'd of
supplying _Conti_'s Place in the King's Favour; wherefore to ingratiate
himself, he deplor'd the Exile's Misfortune, and promis'd to use his
utmost Endeavours to have him recall'd. He told the Prince at the same
time, that it was in his own power to remedy this, or any Grievance of
the like nature; that he was of Age, and had been so a great while; that
he might as soon as he pleased take the Supreme Command upon himself,
then recall _Conti_, and let him triumph over the Queen, and all his
other Enemies.

The King was pleas'd with this Advice, and determin'd to follow it; the
Count was his sole Confidant and Favourite: however, he desir'd the King
that their Intimacy should still be a Secret, that the Queen might not
suspect him: but it could not be long conceal'd from this Princess, who
meeting him one day in the King's Train, caught him by the Arm, and
staring him in the face with that Majestick Air, which made every one
tremble; "I am inform'd, Count, _said she_, that the King is wholly
govern'd by your Counsels; take therefore good care of him, for if he
does any thing to thwart me, your Life shall answer it."

The Count, without answering, made a submissive Bow, and follow'd the
King, who call'd him. As soon as he was alone with him, he gave him an
account of what the Queen had said: "I suppose, _continued he_, that I
shall shorty share _Conti_'s Fate, but yet with Joy should I go to
Banishment, could I at the same time see my King shake off the Authority
of an imperious Mother, who will let him enjoy the Title, but never the
Power of a Sovereign."

This artful Discourse threw the Prince into a violent Passion, and he
would go immediately and take the Royal Authority from the Queen, by
taking the Great Seal, which is the Mark of it; but the Count, who knew
too well what the consequence of this would be, advis'd him to retire to
_Alcantra_, and from thence to send Couriers to the Magistrates of
_Lisbon_, and to all the Governours of Provinces, to let them know that
he was of Age, and had taken the Government upon himself.

The King approv'd the Counsel, and having that Evening disguis'd
himself, he left the Palace, follow'd only by the Count and a few
Friends. That Night they arriv'd at _Alcantra_, from whence he sent
Orders to the Secretaries of State, and to the _German_ Guard, to come
to him; and at the same time dispatch'd Couriers to every Town of
_Portugal_, to let them know that he was of Age, and by consequence the
Regency of the Queen at an end.

Most of the Court set out for _Alcantra_, and the Queen saw herself in a
manner forsaken; notwithstanding which, she resolv'd to lay down her
Authority as became her: wherefore she wrote to the King, to ask him the
reason why he took possession of the Throne like an Usurper, that had no
Right to it; and added, that if he would return to _Lisbon_, she would
lay down her Authority in presence of the Grandees and the Magistrates.
The King accordingly return'd, and the Queen having summon'd the
Grandees, Magistrates, and others of the Nobility, to attend her, in
presence of the Assembly took the Seals out of the Great Purse, and
putting them into her Son's Hand, "Here are, _said she_, the Seals,
which, together with the Regency, were entrusted to my Care by the Will
of my late Sovereign Lord: I return them to your Majesty with all the
Authority, which they are the Emblems of; I heartily pray God that you
may make a good use of them, and that your Reign may be as prosperous as
I can wish it." The King took the Seals, and gave them to the first
Secretary of State; after which the Prince, and all the Grandees, kiss'd
his Hand, and acknowledg'd him their Sovereign.

The Queen Dowager had given out, that she intended in six Months time to
retire into a Convent, but that six Months she would spend at Court, to
see what Measures the young King would take. But the Favourite Count,
who still dreaded that Princess, who knew her tow'ring Genius, and was
sensible of the natural Sway which a Mother has over the Mind of her
Son, persuaded the King to treat her most inhumanly, that by frequent
Affronts he might oblige her to leave the Court much sooner than she
intended. The Queen, who was of a haughty Temper, could not bear to be
thus us'd, but immediately threw herself into a Convent; where, being
fully satisfy'd of the Vanities of human Greatness, she spent the
Remainder of her Time, which was scarce a Year, in preparing herself for
another World, and died on the eighteenth of _February_, 1666. lamented
by the whole Nation: for never was there a Princess of a more
extraordinary Genius, or more amply endow'd with all the Vertues
requisite to either the one or the other Sex. Whilst on the Throne, she
shew'd a truly great and heroick Soul; when she quitted it for a
religious Life, she seem'd entirely to have forgotten what Pomp and
Grandeur were, and all her Ambition then was to deserve Heaven.

The King, who now saw himself fully at liberty, and no longer fear'd the
prudent Queen's just Reproofs, gave a loose to his Passions, and
indulg'd his pernicious Inclinations. He would scour the Streets at
Night with his Bravoes, and abuse every one he met with; nor did the
Watch fare better than their Neighbours. Never a Night did he ramble,
but the next Morning tragical Histories were publish'd, of several who
had been wounded or murder'd in the Streets; and People fled before him
with greater Fear than they would before a hungry Lion, just broke loose
from his Den.

The Count _de Castel-Melhor_ was his first Minister; he was an
intriguing, insinuating Courtier, but far from being an able Statesman:
haughty in Prosperity, fawning and timorous in Adversity. In his hands
were the Reins of the Government, the King reserving no Authority to
himself, but that of doing what mischief he pleas'd unpunish'd; nor did
the Count ever make it his business to reclaim him, well knowing that
the King's Follies and his Authority were inseparable.

The _Spaniards_ flatter'd themselves with the Hopes of easily reducing
_Portugal_, whilst it had such a Monarch as Don _Alphonso_. To this end
they sent a strong Army against it, under the Command of Don _John_ of
_Austria_, natural Son to _Philip_ IV. The King of _Portugal_ sent
_Schomberg_ to oppose him, notwithstanding the Count _de Villa-Flor_ had
the Title of Generalissimo. And to the Count of _Schomberg_'s Courage
and Conduct it was that Don _Alphonso_ ow'd the Preservation of his
Crown: He beat the _Spaniards_ several times, notwithstanding what
_Villa-Flor_ did; who, jealous of his Glory, endeavour'd all he could
to cross his Measures, and had effectually done it, had not
_Schomberg_'s Interest been greater both at Court and in the Army, which
joyfully obey'd the Commands of their brave Leader, who always led them
to a certain Victory.

_Castel-Melhor_ did all he could to persuade the People, that this happy
Success was owing to him; though if the Truth had been search'd into, it
would have appear'd that all he could justly boast of, was his being the
first Man to whom the News was sent. By these means the Minister's
Credit encreas'd, and he actually enjoy'd the Sovereign Authority. The
King was nothing but a piece of Clock-work, whose Springs he could wind
up, and put into what Motion he pleas'd. The Barbarity of his Temper he
made use of, to ruin and destroy all those of whom he was jealous;
amongst these were the greatest part of the late Queen's Ministry: so
that there was a strange Alteration at Court, all Places were fill'd
with the Count's Creatures; nor could any one hope for Favour, but those
who took care to please the Favourite. _Melhor_ went farther than this,
for _Conti_ being recall'd, he got him banish'd a second time; for no
sooner was he landed, but the King sent him an Express, to congratulate
him upon his safe Arrival, and _Melhor_, by the same Express, sent him
Orders not to come near the Court: such a Sway had this Minister over
his Sovereign, that he durst not contradict his Orders, but for fear of
dipleasing him, was obliged to see _Conti_ in private. The Count had
notice of it, and fearing that should their antient Intimacy be renew'd,
there would be no place left for him in the King's Favour, had him
accus'd of a Design upon the Prince's Life; and tho there were no
Witnesses found, no Proofs, no Probabilities of his Guilt, yet Sentence
of Banishment was pass'd upon him.

The Count, no longer apprehensive of _Conti_, began to consider how he
should secure his Interest at Court, in case of any Accident. To this
end he endeavour'd to ingratiate himself with Don _Pedro_, the King's
Brother, but a Prince of a quite different Character: His Soul was truly
great, and his Inclinations noble; his Actions princely, and his manner
of Living regular: the _Portuguese_ admir'd, or rather ador'd him, for
he had not his own Vertues only, but his Brother's Vices also, to set
him off.

To this end, _Melhor_ plac'd a Brother of his in the Prince's Houshold,
and bad him do all he could to insinuate himself into his Master's
Favour, as he had into the King's; hoping by these means to govern both
the Princes.

Don _Pedro_ us'd him with all the Civility imaginable, and shew'd him
more than common Respect; but as for giving him any place in his Favour,
or Confidance, he could not; the whole was taken up. The late Queen
having always look'd upon her younger Son as the Hopes and Support of
her Family, she had taken care to put about him none but those, whose
Wisdom, Learning, and Integrity might entitle them to a share of the
Prince's Love; such were his Governours, and of such chiefly was his
Houshold compos'd. These had taken care to let the Prince know, that he
need not despair of one day wearing the Crown of _Portugal_, for that
there was no great likelihood of his Brother's ever having any Children;
but at the same time they told him, that there was nothing but _Melhor_
was capable of doing, to keep him from inheriting the Crown, since he
was well assur'd that he must never hope for any share in the Ministry,
when Don _Pedro_ should ascend the Throne.

By degrees these different Views and Interests divided the Court into
two Cabals; the Count indeed had the greatest Number on his side, there
being more who love to swim with the Stream, than against it. But the
ablest Statesmen, who plainly saw that so violent and arbitrary a
Government could not last long, with all the Grandees, and the best of
the Nobility, who would not cringe to such a Favourite as the King's
was, were always about the Prince, to whom they paid their Respects as
to the Heir apparent.

The Count being sensible that the Hope of the adverse Faction was
founded upon the Infirmity of the King, determin'd to destroy it at
once, by marrying him; and by his Advice a Match was propos'd and
concluded between the King and _Mary-Elizabeth-Frances_ of _Savoy_,
Daughter to _Charles_ Duke of _Nemours_, and _Elizabeth de Vendome_.
_C√¶sar d'Estr√©es_, a Relation of hers, Bishop and Duke of _Laon_, and
known all over _Europe_ by the Name of the illustrious Cardinal
_d'Estr√©es_, conducted her into _Portugal_, accompany'd with the
Marquiss _de Ruvigni_, the _French_ Ambassador, and several other
Persons of Quality.

This Marriage was celebrated with all the Pomp and Magnificence
imaginable. The whole Court admir'd the young Queen's extraordinary
Beauty, but no one was more sensibly affected with it than the Prince.
The King was the only Person who seem'd regardless of her Charms, and
who by his Indifference soon convinc'd the whole Nation, that he had
taken the Name of a Husband, but was not capable of discharging the Duty
of one.

Count _Melhor_ had at first flatter'd himself with the Hopes of
governing the Queen as well as the King, but soon found that she had too
great a Spirit for such a Submission. Enrag'd at this, he resolv'd to
lose no Opportunity of revenging himself, all publick Business was
carefully hid from her, all her Desires were cross'd; her Recommendation
certainly excluded any Person from the Place to which she recommended
him. Shortly after, neither the Expences of her Houshold, nor her own
Pensions were paid, under pretence that the War and other Necessities of
the State had exhausted the Royal Treasury. And so insolent was this
haughty Minister to every body, to the Prince himself, but especially to
the Queen, that she has been often seen coming out of the King's
Apartment bath'd in Tears.

Her Beauty, her Merits, her Misfortunes, and the Complaints of all the
Ladies of the Court, and the Officers of the Queen's Houshold, whose
Salaries were stopp'd, touch'd the Hearts of all those who had not an
immediate Dependence on the Minister; and these form'd a third Party at
Court, where nothing now was talk'd of but the Improbability of the
Queen's having any Children, tho she had not yet been married a Year.

What encreas'd every one's Suspicion, was the Report which was spread of
a private Door, which by the King's Order was made in the Queen's
Chamber, and open'd just against her Bed-side, and of which he himself
kept the Key. The Queen was alarm'd at the Novelty of the thing, and the
Danger to which she saw her Honour expos'd. And many concluded, that
this was an Artifice of _Melhor_'s, who, notwithstanding the Infirmity
of the King, was nevertheless resolv'd that the Queen should have
Children.

The poor unfortunate Princess discover'd her Apprehensions to her
Confessor, with Orders to impart them to the Prince's. These two
Religious Men advis'd them to unite their Cabals, and go hand in hand
together in a Matter so much the Concern of them both. The Count of
_Schomberg_ was easily drawn into this Party, and the Prince took care
to make himself beloved by the Magistrates of the City, and all those
who had any influence over the People.

It would have been a very easy matter to have push'd the King from out
his Throne, had he not had a Minister to support him, who was ambitious,
could govern the King as he pleas'd, make him do any thing, and who
would spare no pains to preserve himself at the head of Affairs; the
only way therefore of compassing their Ends, was to remove this Man,
which was at last brought about in this manner. One of his Friends was
bribed to tell him, that the Prince had swore he would sacrifice him, if
he continued any longer at Court. The Count upon this Information
doubled the Guards, arm'd all the Officers of the Household, and would
have had the King go at the head of them, and seize the Prince. But as
furious as the King was in his Midnight-Revels and Debauches, he had not
Courage enough to attempt any thing of this nature, justly fearing that
he should meet with no small Resistance. Wherefore he only wrote a
Letter to the Prince, to order him to come to the Palace. He excus'd
himself, objecting that he could not come whilst the Count was at Court,
who had spread so many Stories to his disadvantage, and endeavour'd all
he could to blast his Reputation; besides which, the Count was Master of
the Palace, and that therefore he fear'd he could not be in safety
there. Several Letters pass'd between the King and Prince; the former
offer'd, that _Melhor_ should come, and on his Knees beg his pardon.
But this was not what the Prince wanted, and he openly refus'd to come
to Court till _Melhor_ was banish'd from it.

The News of this had put _Lisbon_ into a strange Confusion, and a Civil
War was just breaking out; but _Melhor_ with grief perceiv'd that
_Schomberg_ favour'd the other Party, and that the Grandees of the
Kingdom had all unanimously declar'd themselves in favour of the Prince;
who, assisted also by the Queen's Friends, grew too powerful for him.
Nay, _Melhor_'s very Relations, and those whom he had rais'd, forsook
him, and told him, that if he must sink, he should sink alone. Wherefore
disguising himself, he by Night escaped from the Palace, and retired to
a Monastery seven Leagues from _Lisbon_; which he soon after left, to
seek a sure Refuge in the Court of _Turin_.

Upon this the Prince immediately came to the Palace, to pay his Devoirs
to the King; every thing fell under his Management, and he soon
dispersed all the late Favourite's Creatures. The King, destitute of
Counsel, lay at the Prince's mercy, who had a Design upon, but durst not
as yet touch his Crown, for fear of being thought an Usurper; but waited
with patience till it should be given him by Lawful Authority, that is,
by a Decree of the States of the Kingdom.

But then it was in the King's power only to call together this Assembly
of the States, which he was often advis'd to do, there being an
absolute Necessity of their Meeting, to remedy the present Grievances of
the Nation.

The King was not so weak, but he plainly perceiv'd that this Advice was
given him, with a design to transfer the Royalty from himself to his
Brother; wherefore he long refus'd it, but was at last so press'd to it
both by his Council, and by different Petitions from several Parts of
the Kingdom, that he call'd them together, and they were order'd to meet
on the first of _January_, 1688.

The Prince having obtain'd this, which he look'd upon as a sure step to
the Throne, gave the Queen notice, that it was time for her now to
appear, and play her part. Upon which she immediately retired into a
Convent, and wrote a Letter to the King, to tell him, that she thought
herself in Conscience obliged to quit the Palace, since he was not
capable of being her Husband; that he was very sensible that their
Marriage was never consummated, and that therefore she begg'd that he
would repay her her Portion, and give her leave to return to her
Country, and amongst her own Relations.

Upon the Receipt of this Letter, the King in a great Rage flew towards
the Convent, to fetch the Queen back to the Palace by force; but the
Prince, who foresaw the Effect of her Message, took care to be at the
Convent-Door, with all the Nobility, and told his Brother this was a
Place too sacred to have any Violence us'd in it, and persuaded, or
rather forc'd the King to return to the Palace, who all the way
complain'd of being calumniated, and was for bringing half the
Prostitutes of _Lisbon_ to prove his Virility, and swore that he would
be reveng'd both on the Queen and the Prince.

[Sidenote: _Nov. 23. 1667._]

But Don _Pedro_ was not in the least frightned at his Menaces, knowing
that the whole Power of the Kingdom was in his own hands; and the next
Morning (thinking it unsafe to delay the mighty Work any longer) order'd
the Council to assemble, and follow'd by the Nobility, the Magistracy,
and a whole Crowd of People, who wanted to see the Event of this
Business, he went into the Palace to them; and after a short Debate, an
Order was sent by the Prince to arrest the King, who shortly after this
sign'd his own Abdication.

Notwithstanding this, the Prince would not take any other Title, but
that of Regent; under which Name the States of the Kingdom took the Oath
of Allegiance to him.

[Sidenote: _Febr. 13. 1668._]

The next thing he did, was to secure a Peace with _Spain_; the King of
_England_ made himself their Mediator, and _Spain_, by a solemn Treaty,
acknowledg'd the Crown of _Portugal_ independent of the Crown of
_Spain_.

[Sidenote: _Nov. 22. 1667._]

[Sidenote: _Mar. 24. 1668._]

But one thing was still wanting to compleat the Regent's Happiness: he
loved his Sister-in-law; who, as soon as she was got into the Convent,
had presented a Petition to the Chapter of the Cathedral of _Lisbon_,
to desire them, during the Vacancy of the Holy See, to declare her
Marriage void; since, notwithstanding fifteen Months Cohabitation with
her Husband, it had not been consummated. The Chapter, without waiting
for any farther Proof, immediately declar'd the Marriage void.

[Sidenote: _March 2. 1668._]

[Sidenote: _Dec. 10. 1668._]

By these means the Regent saw himself at liberty to marry his
Sister-in-law; however, he was advis'd, for fear of scandalizing any
one, to get a Dispensation from the See of _Rome_. Just at this time the
Cardinal _de Vendome_, Legate _√† Latere_, was order'd by the See to put
on the Papal Dignity, that he might assist as Pope at the Christening of
the Dauphin of _France_; from him was the Dispensation obtain'd, which
Mr. _Verjus_ arriv'd with in _Portugal_ about the time that the Chapter
pronounced their Sentence. All which Accidents falling out together,
made some People imagine that they were premeditated. The Bishop of
_Targa_, Coadjutor to the Archbishop of Lisbon, married them in virtue
of this Brief, which was afterwards confirm'd by Pope _Innocent_ IX.

Don _Alphonso_ was banish'd to the Isle of _Tercera_, which belongs to
the _Portuguese_. This something displeas'd the People, who generally
pity the Unfortunate, and who now cry'd out, that it was enough to rob
him of his Wife and Crown, without driving him from his Country; but
however, no one dar'd speak to the Regent about it. He continued in this
Exile till the Year 1675, at which time the Regent recall'd him, being
inform'd that there were some discontented People contriving how to
fetch him from _Tercera_, and reinstate him in the Throne. He died not
far from _Lisbon_, 1683, and at his Death Don _Pedro_ was proclaim'd
King; a Title he would not, during his Brother's Life, accept, and the
only thing of which he had not depriv'd that unfortunate Prince.


                              _=FINIS=._

[Illustration]




[Illustration]


INDEX.


  A.

  Abdalla, _King of ~Morocco~_, 5.

  Acugna, _Archbishop of ~Lisbon~, his Character_, 24.
    _His Speech to the Confederate Nobility_, 25.
    _Is made Lord-Lieutenant of ~Portugal~ after the Revolution_, 65.

  Aiamonti, _a ~Castilian~ Nobleman, related to the Queen of
      ~Portugal~_, 76.
    _Negotiates a Business between the King of ~Portugal~ and the
        Governour of ~Andalusia~_, ibid.
    _Discovers the ~Spanish~ Plot_, 85.
    _His Character_, 91.
    _Writes to the Duke of ~Medina Sidonia~, to persuade him to
        revolt_, 92.
    _Is seiz'd as a Traitor_, 104.
    _Deceiv'd by ~Olivarez~_, 114.
    _His Courage when led to Execution_, 115.

  Alba, _the Duke of, General to ~Philip II.~ King of ~Spain~,
      conquers ~Portugal~_, 12

  Almada, _a Castle near ~Lisbon~_, 29

  Almada, _~Antonio~ and ~Lewis~, two of the Conspirators_, 25

  Almanzor, _the Caliph, conquers ~Spain~_, 2

  Almeida, _one of the chief Conspirators, his Character_, 24.
    _Is deputed with two more to confer with the Duke of
        ~Braganza~_, 30

  Alphonso VI. _King of ~Castile~ and ~Leon~, gives ~Portugal~
      in Dowry with his Daughter to ~Henry~ Count of ~Burgundy~_, 3

  Alphonso, _Son to the former, first King of ~Portugal~_, 4

  Alphonso VI. _King of ~Portugal~, is but thirteen Years old when
      his Father dies_, 117.
    _His Character_, 121.
    _Debaucheries_, 122.
    _Retires to ~Alcantra~_, 124.
    _Takes the Government upon himself_, 125.
    _Marries ~Mary-Elizabeth-Frances~ of ~Savoy~, Princess of
        ~Nemours~_, 130.
    _Signs his Abdication_, 136.
    _Is banish'd to ~Tercera~_, 137.
    _Recall'd, and dies near ~Lisbon~_, 138

  Antonio, _Grand-Prior of ~Crato~, pretends to the Crown of
      ~Portugal~_, 10.
    _Is proclaim'd King by the People, and defeated by the Duke of
        ~Alba~_, 12

  Aviedo, _the Duke of, an Officer in ~Africa~ under ~Don
      Sebastian~_, 9


  B.

  Baeze, _a rich ~Jew~ of ~Lisbon~, drawn into the Conspiracy against
      the King of ~Portugal~_, 84.
    _Sends Letters for the other Conspirators_
    _into Castile_, ibid.
    _Is examin'd, and confesses_, 88

  Baynetto, _an ~Italian~ Nobleman, arrested at ~Lisbon~_, 62

  Braganza, _Don ~James~ Duke of, claims the Crown of ~Portugal~ at
      the Death of the Cardinal King_, 10.
    _But does not assert his Right by Force of Arms_, 12

  Braganza, _~Theodossus~, Son to the former, his Character_, 15

  Braganza, _Don ~John~, Grandson to Don ~James~, his Character_, 15.
    _Stratagems us'd to draw him out of ~Portugal~_, 17.
    _Is made Governour of that Kingdom, and General of the ~Spanish~
        Forces in it_, 18.
    _~Olivarez~'s Design to arrest him when on board the Admiral's
        Ship_, ibid.
    _All Governours of Forts and strong Places order'd to seize him_, 19.
    _He disappoints them_, 20.
    _Comes to ~Lisbon~_, 29.
    _His Answer to the Confederate Nobility_, 32.
    _Is proclaim'd King_, 56.
    _Endeavours to make the Governour of ~Andalusia~ rebel against the
        King of ~Spain~_, 76.
    _His Death and Character_, 116

  Braganza, _~Louisa de Gusman~, married to Don ~John~, her
      Character_, 33.
    _Her Answers to the Duke when he talk'd about his Restoration_, 36.
    _Her Answer to the Archbishop of ~Lisbon~, when he begg'd the Life
        of a Traitor_, 90.
    _Is made Regent_, 117.
    _Engages the Earl of ~Schomberg~ to come and command her Forces_,
        118.
    _Marries her Daughter to King ~Charles II.~ of England_, 119.
    _Her Speech to the Count ~de Castel-Melhor~_, 124.
    _To her Son when she resign'd the Regency_, 125.
    _Retires into a Convent, and dies_, 126


  C.

  Camino, _the Duke of, assists at the King's Coronation_, 72.
    _Conspires against him_, 80.
    _Is arrested_, 86.
    _Executed_, 90

  Cardenas, _Don ~Didaco~, Lieutenant-General of the ~Spanish~
      Cavalry, is arrested at ~Lisbon~ at the time of the
      Revolution_, 62

  Castel-Melhor, _Favourite and first Minister of State to ~Alphonsus
      VI.~ King of ~Portugal~, his Character_, 123.
    _Persuades the King to take the Government upon himself_, ibid.
    _To affront the Queen his Mother, that she might retire from
        Court_, 126.
    _Places his Brother near the Prince_, 129.
    _Marries the King_, 130.
    _Yet cannot agree with the Queen_, 131.
    _Persuades the King to go himself and arrest the Prince_, 133.
    _Is forc'd to leave the Court, and fly to ~Turin~_, 134

  Catherine _of ~Austria~, Regent of ~Portugal~ during the Minority
      of Don ~Sebastian~_, 4

  Catherine de Medicis _pretends to the Crown of ~Portugal~_, 11

  Catherine, _Daughter to King ~John IV.~ of ~Portugal~, married to
      King ~Charles II.~_, 119

  Castro-Marino, _a Town in ~Portugal~_, 95

  Challenge _sent to the King of ~Portugal~_, 107

  Cherifs, _a Law of theirs_, 5

  Ciudad-real, _the Duke of, enters ~Cadiz~ with ten thousand Men_, 104.

  Conti, _the Son of a Merchant of ~Lisbon~, ~Alphonsus~'s first
      Favourite_, 122.
    _Is banish'd by the Regent Queen into ~Brazil~_, ibid.
    _Recall'd by the King, but banish'd again by ~Castel-Melhor~_, 128

  Correa, _a Clerk of ~Vasconcellos~'s, runs out as the Conspirators
      are coming up to the Secretary's Apartment_, 56.
    _And receives several Stabs, but does not die_, 57.
    _Conspires against the King of ~Portugal~_, 81.
    _And is executed with the other Traitors_, 90

  Coreo, _a Citizen of ~Lisbon~, an Instrument of the Revolution_, 43

  Coutingno, _Don ~Gaston~, during the time of the Revolution delivers
      the Prisoners_, 63


  D.

  Del Campo, _Governor of the Citadel of ~Lisbon~, surrenders to the
      Confederate Nobility_, 64

  Diego Garcez Palleia, _a Captain of Foot, defends ~Vasconcellos~ for
      some time_, 57

  Daiamonti, _vid. ~Aiamonti~_.


  E.

  Estrees _related to the young Queen of ~Portugal~, Bishop and Duke
      of ~Laon~, and known by the Name of the Cardinal ~d'Estrees~_, 130

  Evora, _the People of, rise in a tumultuous manner, and declare
      themselves for the House of ~Braganza~_, 16


  F.

  Ferdinand de Castro, _Comptroller of the Navy-Office, arrested at
      ~Lisbon~ at the time of the Revolution_, 62

  Ferdinand de la Cueva, _Governour of the Citadel of ~St. John~'s,
      surrenders upon Terms_, 71

  Ferreira, _the Marquiss of, is of opinion that all the Traitors ought
      to be executed_, 89


  G.

  Goa, _and all the other Places in ~India~ and ~Africa~, which
      formerly belong'd to ~Portugal~, revolt from the King of
      ~Spain~, and acknowledge the Duke of ~Braganza~_, 77

  Garray, _Don ~John~, Lieutenant-General of the ~Spanish~ Forces,
      Second to the Duke of ~Medina~_, 114

  George, _Brother to the Lord ~Ranger~, a Conspirator_, 25.
    _Reveals the Conspiracy to a Relation_, 52


  H.

  Hamet, _Brother to ~Muley-Moluc~, King of ~Morocco~, commands the
      Army_, 8

  D'Haro, _Don ~Lewis~, Nephew to ~Olivarez~_, 103

  Henry, _Count of ~Burgundy~, Son to ~Robert~ King of ~France~,
      drives the ~Moors~ from ~Portugal~_, 3

  Henry, _Cardinal and Archbishop of ~Evora~, succeeds Don
      ~Sebastian~_, 10.
    _Refuses to name his Successor_, 12

  Hyde, _Chancellor of ~England~, persuades King ~Charles II.~ to
      marry the Infanta of ~Portugal~_, 119


  I.

  Jews _conspire against the King of ~Portugal~_, 82

  Inchequin, _General of the ~English~ Forces in ~Portugal~_, 120

  Inquisitor, _the ~Grand~, conspires against the King_, 81.
    _Is arrested_, 86.
    _And condemn'd to perpetual Imprisonment_, 90

  John, _Don, Prince of ~Portugal~, Son to King ~John III.~ dies
      before his Father_, 4

  John, _Don, of ~Austria~, natural Son to ~Philip IV.~ King of
      ~Spain~, and General of the Troops sent against ~Portugal~_, 127

  Julian, _an ~Italian~ Nobleman, invites the ~Moors~ into
      ~Spain~_, 2


  L.

  Lemos, _a Merchant of ~Lisbon~, and an Instrument of the
      Revolution_, 43

  Lewis de Camara, _a Jesuit, Tutor to Don ~Sebastian~_, 4

  Lewis de Castile, _is sent by the Duke of ~Medina~ to the Marquis
      ~Daiamonti~_, 92.
    _Returns back to the Duke_, 94


  M.

  Margaret _of ~Savoy~, Dutchess of ~Mantua~, Vice-Queen of
      ~Portugal~_, 14.
    _Complains of ~Vasconcellos~'s Conduct_, 40.
    _Endeavours to appease the Confederate Nobility_, 59.
    _Is confin'd_, 61.
    _Removes to ~Xabregas~-House_, 67

  Mattos, _Don ~Sebastian de Norogna~, Archbishop of ~Braga~, and
      President of the Chamber of ~Opaco~_, 24.
    _Conspires against the King of ~Portugal~_, 78.
    _Confesses his Crime_, 88.
    _Dies in Prison_, 90

  Mello, _Lord ~Ranger~, one of the Conspirators_, 25.
    _Cuts the ~Spanish~ Guard to pieces_, 55.
    _Acquaints the Duke and Dutchess of ~Braganza~ with the Success
        of their Enterprize_, 69

  Mendoza, _another of the chief Conspirators_, 25.
    _Meets the Duke of ~Braganza~ in a Forest, and confers with him_, 39.
    _Goes with ~Mello~ to ~Villa-viciosa~_, 69

  Menezes, _~Alexis~, Governour to Don ~Sebastian~_, 4

  Menezes, _~Antonio~, his Answer to the Vice-Queen_, 60

  Medina Sidonia, _~Gaspar Perez de Gusman~, Duke of, Brother-in-law to
      the King of ~Portugal~, resolves to have himself crown'd King
      of ~Andalusia~_, 92.
    _Sends his Confidant to the Marquiss ~Daiamonti~_, 94.
    _His Intent discover'd_, 100.
    _Is sent for to the Court of ~Spain~_, 103.
    _And pardon'd_, 104.
    _He challenges the King of ~Portugal~_, 107

  Monsano, _the Count ~de~_, 72

  Muley Mahomet, _flies to the Court of ~Portugal~ for Refuge_, 5.
    _Goes into ~Africa~ with Don ~Sebastian~_, 7.
    _Is drown'd in the River ~Mucazen~_, 10

  Muley Moluc, _takes possession of the Kingdom of ~Morocco~_, 5.
    _Gives the Command of the Army to his Brother ~Hamet~_, 8.
    _Dies during the Battle_, 9


  N.

  Norogna, _one of the Confederate Nobility, his passionate Answer to
      the Vice-Queen_, 61


  O.

  Olivarez, _the Duke of, of the House of the ~Gusmans~, first
      Minister to ~Philip IV.~ King of ~Spain~_, 13.
    _His Policy_, ibid.
    _Orders the Duke of ~Braganza~ to come immediately into
        ~Spain~_, 47.
    _His artful way of acquainting the King with the Revolution_, 74.
    _Obtains the Duke of ~Medina~'s Pardon_, 104.
    _And then makes him challenge the King of ~Portugal~_, 105

  Ozorio, _Don ~Lopez~, the ~Spanish~ Admiral, has private Orders
      to seize the Duke of ~Braganza~, and bring him into
      ~Spain~_, 18


  P.

  Parma, _the Duke of, pretends to the Crown of ~Portugal~_, 10

  Pelagus, _founds the Kingdom of ~Leon~_, 3

  Pedro, _Don, Prince of ~Portugal~, his Character_, 129.
    _Is misused by Count ~Castel-Melhor~_, ibid.
    _Arrests the King_, 136.
    _Is declared Regent_, ibid.
    _Marries the young Queen_, 137.
    _After his Brother's Death is proclaim'd King_, 138

  Philip II. _King of ~Spain~, claims the Crown of ~Portugal~_, 10.
    _Takes possession of it by force of Arms_, 12

  Philip IV. _King of ~Spain~, his Character_, 101.
    _Offers King ~Charles~ three Millions to marry a Protestant
        Princess_, 119

  Pinto Ribeiro, _Comptroller of the Duke of ~Braganza~'s Houshold,
      his Policy_, 22.
    _His Answer to a Friend_, 56.
    _Is not promoted by the King_, 76

  Portugal, _its Description_, 1.
    _Acknowledg'd to be a Kingdom independent of the Crown of
        ~Spain~_, 136

  Portuguese, _their Character_, 2

  Puebla, _the Marquiss of, Major-Domo to the Vice-Queen, is arrested
      at the time of the Revolution_, 62


  R.

  Richelieu, _the Cardinal of_, 32

  Roderick, _the last King of the ~Goths~ who reign'd in
      ~Portugal~_, 2

  Ruvigni, _the Marquiss of, the ~French~ Ambassador, accompanies the
      Princess of ~Nemours~ into ~Portugal~_, 131


  S.

  Saa, _Lord-Chamberlain, one of the Conspirators_, 25.
    _Shoots ~Vasconcellos~ thro the Head_, 58

  Saldaigni, _another of the Conspirators_, 62

  Sancho, _Paymaster of the ~Spanish~ Troops in ~Portugal~, is
      detain'd Prisoner there_, 96.
    _Discovers to ~Olivarez~ the Duke of ~Medina~'s Intent to
        revolt_, 100

  Sande, _the Marquiss of, sent into ~England~ by the Regent of
      ~Portugal~ to conclude the Match between the Infanta and King
      ~Charles II.~_, 119

  Savoy, _~Philibert-Emanuel~, Duke of, pretends to the Crown of
      ~Portugal~_, 10

  Schomberg, _~Frederick~, Count of, is invited by the Queen of
      ~Portugal~ to be her General_, 118.
    _Takes his way thro ~England~, and treats of a Marriage between
        the Infanta and King ~Charles~_, 119.
    _Beats the ~Spaniards~ during the Regent's time_, 120.
    _As also under the Reign of ~Alphonso~_, 127

  Soarez d'Albergaria, _the Corregidor, is kill'd at the time of the
      Revolution_, 56

  Soure, _the Portuguese Ambassador in ~France~, treats with
      ~Schomberg~_, 118


  T.

  Tubal, _the ~Portuguese~ pretend to be descended from him_, 2


  V.

  Vasconcellos, _Secretary to the ~Spanish~ Regency in
      ~Portugal~_, 14.
    _His Haughtiness and Cruelty_, 26, 27.
    _Is killed in the Revolution_, 58.
    _His Character_, 59

  Velasco, Nicholas de, _of the Order of ~St. Francis~, is sent by the
      Marquiss ~Daiamonti~ into ~Portugal~_, 95.
    _His Pride and Inconsiderateness_, 96.
    _Discovers his Business to ~Sancho~, who betrays him_, 99

  Villa-Flor, _the ~Portuguese~ Generalissimo_, 127

  Villa-Viciosa, _the Seat of the Dukes of ~Braganza~_, 16

  Villareal, _the Marquiss of, assists at the King of ~Portugal~'s
      Coronation_, 72.
    _Conspires against him_, 80.
    _Is arrested_, 86.
    _And executed_, 90

  Villenes, _her Behaviour and Speech to her Sons_, 54.


  X.

  Xabregas, _a Palace of ~Lisbon~_, 67


                            _The End of the Index._




     _BOOKS Printed, and Sold, by ~W. CHETWOOD~, at ~Cato~'s-~Head,
     Russel-street, Covent-Garden~._


1. Novels, Tales, and Stories, (never printed in _English_ before)
written by that celebrated Wit of _France_, the Countess _D'Anois_, in 2
Vol. 12mo. 1. The History of Don _Gabriel_. 2. The Royal Ram. 3. The
Story of _Finetta_ the Cinder-Girl. 4. The Palace of Revenge. 5. The
Story of _Anguilletta_. 6. The History of Don _Ferdinand_ of _Toledo_.
7. The Story of the Yellow-Dwarf. 8. The Story of Young-and-Handsome. 9.
The History of the New Gentleman-Citizen. 10. The Story of the
White-Cat. 11. The Story of _Fortunio_ the fortunate Knight. 12. The
Story of the Pidgeon and Dove. 13. The Story of the Princess
_Fair-Star_, and Prince _Chery_. 14. The Story of the Princess
_Carpillona_. 15. Perfect Love, a Story. All translated from the best
Edition of the original _French_, by several Hands. Price bound of the
two Volumes, 5 _s._

2. _Ildegerte_ Queen of _Norway_, or Heroick Love; written in _French_
by the Author of the _Happy Slave_, and translated into _English_ by a
Gentleman of _Oxford_, 8_vo._ Price bound 3 _s._

3. Love in Excess, or the Fatal Enquiry, in three Parts compleat. By
Mrs. _Haywood_. Price bound 6 _s._

4. The Prince of _Carency_, written originally in _French_ by the
Countess _D'Anois_. Price 4 _s._

5. Collection of Novels, in 4 Vol. Pr. bound 12 _s._

6. _Antiochus_ and _Stratonice_, by Mr. _Theobald_. Price bound 2 _s._ 6
_d._

7. The Pastoral Amours of _Daphnis_ and _Cloe_, adorn'd with Cuts. Price
bound 2 _s._ stitch'd 1 _s._ 6 _d._

8. The _Spaniard_; or Don _Zara del Fogo_. 1 _s._ 6 _d._

9. The entertaining History of _Hippolita_ and _Aminta_, being a
Collection of diverting Novels. Pr. bound 3 _s._

10. _Fontenell_'s Letters of Love and Gallantry. By Mr. _Ozell_. Price
bound 2 _s._

11. _Manley_'s Novels. Price bound 5 _s._

12. Memoirs of a Cavalier; or a Journal of the War in _Germany_ and
_England_. Price bound 5 _s._

13. The Adventures of _Theagenes_ and _Chariclia_, in five Novels. (1.)
The Loves of _Theagenes_ and _Chariclia_. (2.) The treacherous Slave, or
the cruel Stepmother. (3.) The wandering Prelate. (4.) The fighting
Priest. 5. The Royal Adulteress. In 2 vol. in 12_mo._ Price bound 5 _s._

14. The Life and Amours of _Muley Ishmael_, King of _Morocco_. Price
bound 2 _s._ 6 _d._

15. Love-Letters from a Lady of Quality to a Chevalier, translated from
the Original _French_. With an Essay concerning Writings of this Nature.
By Mrs. _Haywood_. Price 3 _s._

16. _Le Clerc_ on several Subjects, _viz._ Criticism, History, Morality,
and Politicks. Price bound 4 _s._

17. A Letter to the Deists and Free-thinkers. 1 _s._

18. Criticks; being an impartial Account of the present Times: written
by Mr. _Brereton_ of _Brazen-Nose-College, Oxon._ 2 _s._ 6 _d._

19. Discourses concerning the Ever-Blessed Trinity. 1. The Folly of
Atheism. 2. The Name, Nature, and Being of God. 3. The Trinity in Unity.
4. Baptism in the Trinity. 5. The Word ever God. 6. Jesus Christ equal
with God. 7. Jesus Christ the Image of God. 8. The Angelical Worship of
Jesus Christ. 9. The Word made Flesh. 10. The Spirit of Truth a Divine
Person. 11. The Holy Ghost the Paraclete. 12. The Punishment of
Apostacy. By the Author of the Divine Right of Episcopacy. 4 _s._

20. Voyages and Adventures of Captain _Richard Falconer_, containing the
Laws, Customs, and Manners of the _Indians_ in several Parts of
_America_, his Shipwreck, his being thrown on one of the _Alcrane_
Islands, his miserable Distress there, and his miraculous Escape from
thence, and from many other imminent Hazards. With the Account of
_Thomas Randal_ of _Cork_, Pilot, his Dangers and Escapes. As also a
true and particular Relation of the first Discovery, Peopling, and
Planting the Isle of _Madera_. Written originally in _Portugueze_, by
Don _Francisco de Alcafarado_, and translated into _English_ by _W.
Musgrave_, Native of _Jamaica_. 5 _s._

21. A new Voyage to the _East-Indies_, by _Francis Leguat_ and his
Companions, containing their Adventures in two Desert Islands, and an
Account of the most remarkable Things in _Maurice_ Island, _Batavia_,
the _Cape of Good Hope_, and the Island of _St. Helens_; adorn'd with
various Charts, and Cuts of Birds, Beasts, and Fishes. 6 _s._

22. _Collectanea Medica_: The Country Physician; or, A choice Collection
of Physick fitted for vulgar Use. By _W. Salmon_, M. D. 5 _s._

23. A Treatise of the Causes of Incredulity; wherein are examined the
general Motives and Occasions which dispose Unbelievers to reject the
Christian Religion: with two Letters, containing a direct Proof of the
Truth of Christianity. Translated from the French of Monsiur _Le Clerc_.
2 _s._ 6 _d._

24. _Martin_'s Description of the Western Islands of _Scotland, &c._ 5
_s._

25. _Misson_'s Memoirs of _England_. Translated into English by Mr.
_Ozell_. 5 _s._

26. _Bromley_'s Travels over _Europe_. 4 _s._

27. The Gentleman's Recreation, in four Parts; _viz._ Hunting, Hawking,
Fowling, and Fishing: Wherein those generous Exercises are largely
treated of, and the Terms of Art for Hunting and Hawking more amply
enlarg'd than heretofore. Also, the Method, Breeding, and Managing of
Hunting Horses, with their Diseases and Cures. To which is added, an
Abstract of the Forest-Laws, and all Game Laws, since _Magna Charta_ to
this Time; and the Forms of Warrants. Never printed before. Adorn'd with
various Cuts relating to the several Games. The sixth Edition, with
large Additions. 5 _s._


_Now in the Press, and will speedily be Publish'd, the following BOOKS._

1. Arch√¶ology: or, Thoughts of the antient Philosophers, concerning the
Original of Things. Written in _Latin_ by Dr. _Burnet_ of the
_Charter-house_, Author of _The Theory of the Earth_, and translated by
several Hands.

2. Novels, Stories, and Tales, written by _Margaret de Valois_, Queen of
_Navarre_, never printed in _English_ before.

3. The Jealous Lovers; or, the Mistakes: Written originally in
_Spanish_, by that famous Dramatick Poet _Lopez de Vega_.

4. The two Queens of _Brentford_, or _Bayes_ no Poetaster; being the
Sequel of the _Rehearsal_, a Comedy.

5. The _Grecian_ Heroine, or the Fate of Tyranny, a Tragedy.

6. The Triumphs of _Bacchus_, an Opera.

7. The _Athenian_ Jilt, or intriguing Cullies.

8. The Plague of Impertinence, or a Barber a Fury.

9. _Socrates_ and _Timandra_, or Love the best Philosopher: With several
Poems and Songs. These 6 last written by Mr. _D'Urfey_.




FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote A: Jo. Marian√¶ Histor. Hispania illustrata. Hist. de Turquet.
Reusendius de Antiq. Monarchia Lusitana. Connestag. Philippus Rex
Lusitani√¶. Histoire de Portugal, par Monsieur de la Neufvil. Lusitan.
Vindic. Ca√´tan Passar de Bello Lusita. Portugal Restaurado de Menezes.
Siry Mem. Recond. Mercure Fran√ßois. Troubles de Portugal. Mem. d'Ablan.]

[Footnote B: _Cardinal_ Richelieu.]

[Footnote C: Ad h√¶c politicas Artes, bonos & malos Regiminis Dolos,
Dominationis Arcana, humani Latibula ingenii, non modo intelligere
Mulier, sed & pertractare quoque ac provehere, tam Natur√¢ quam
Disciplin√¢ mirific√® instructa fuit. Ca√´tan. Passar. de Bello Lusitan._]

[Footnote D: Macedo _tells us, that it was Don_ Antonio d'Almada.]

[Footnote E: _The Judge in Capital Cases._]




Transcriber's notes:

gesspert is indicated with =

antiqua font is indicated with ~





End of Project Gutenberg's The Revolutions of Portugal, by Abbot De Vertot

